# We Have Always Been Digital: The Poetics of HumanComputer Interaction

## Abstract

We Have Always Been Digital was borne out of the desire to understand a
constellation of critical problems that seem to us particularly modern, spurred
on by the digital age: the perceived corruptive influence of technology, our
increasing reliance on computers for mundane cognitive tasks, the advent of
social media and big data, and the continuing struggle with information
overload. Because of this emphasis, my material is for the most part limited to
the period that corresponds roughly to the development of contemporary
computing. But the scope of the dissertation lies beyond the history of
computer science. My concern is rather with the impact of technology on the
human condition: the ways in which we read, write, think, and create. This
approach necessarily takes one outside the neat divisions suggested by
categories such as "technology," "literature," "art," or "philosophy." The
history of human-computer interaction is a history of technology, sure, but it
is also a literary history, an intellectual history, a cultural and a material
history.

The dissertation takes shape as a series of case studies that weave between
already familiar conversations. Chapter One traces a lineage of thought
experiments carried out by René Descartes, Ludwig Wittgenstein, and Alan
Turing. The chapter culminates in a close reading of transcripts from a
chat-bot competition. Chapter Two explores the premise of machine literature
through the ideas of John Searle and J.L. Austin, a discussion on literary
autopoiesis (self-generation), and finally a brief history of combinatorial
poetics. Chapter Three deals with the trope of the "infinite monkey theorem" in
science, pseudo-science, art criticism, and fiction. This chapter has the
distinction of evaluating a published text written by an actual troupe of
monkeys (armed with typewriters), along with materials from the modern-day
debates on intelligent design. Chapter Four contains a history of concrete
poetry and discusses Heidegger's conservative influence on recent philosophy of
technology. And finally, in Chapter Five, I summarize and critique the
hypothesis of the extended mind, contextualizing it against the background of
documents from mid-century media theory, theater, and the early history of
word-processing.

## Introduction

### Iconography of the digital

What does the digital look like? It looks very blue for one—not just any kind
of blue, but a particularly cool shade of pure blue, which passes from dark to
translucent overtones. The resulting pages produced by an online image search
under the query for "digital" are saturated with that color. Fractals
predominate in the first dozen or so search results. There are things too of
course, many expensive things like scanners, flash cards, circuit boards, and
backup drives, but most of all it is cameras—digital cameras, the very idea of
which is meant to stand in stark contrast to "traditional film photography."
Very few other marketplace objects exhibit such a strong sense of the
opposition between the digital and the analog. These pages also contain the
outdated clichés of yesterday's digital: digital clocks, purple lightning
bolts, and the abstract chrome landscapes made widely available by graphic
editing software in the 1990s. There are numbers. The preferred arrangement is
in a torrential grid—the matrix—descending in the background of a generic
humanoid form, also translucent. Or better yet: a 3D sphere or a face made out
of random characters. Ones and zeros are best arranged as an unending string,
which runs at a slight angle on the Z-axis and beyond the frame, foregrounding
whatever object that is meant to take on the digital as a property.  If we were
to constrict our search chronologically to the twenty first century, we would
see these images give way to a more varied palette, bright prime greens,
yellows, and reds—blocky colors and retro-geometric pixelated shapes. Pixels
take the place of numbers here—not the small invisible pixels of contemporary
computer screens, but the large and boxy pixels that by their very visible
boxy-ness flaunt the digital being of the image. Such an image alludes to the
time when pixels really did stand out as individual units—the technology not
being refined enough to produce the illusion of visual continuity. This faux
lo-fi aesthetic is likely to appeal to the romantic nostalgia many may feel for
the early days of computing, and yet it also is an assertion of independence
from that history. No longer shall the digital serve to emulate reality, nor be
judged merely by its degree of life-like verisimilitude. The blocky world of
Markus Persson's Minecraft (2009) is the antithesis to the magical realism of
Cyan's Myst (1995), the bestselling graphic-adventure PC game of the 20th
century. Where the latter was lauded for immersive photorealistic landscapes,
the former embraces the 8-bit low-fi aesthetic of 1980s gaming consoles. The
net effect is an experiment in deconstruction: fragmented geometrical planes
and almost cubist-like discontinuity of form.  The iconography of the digital
works in the other direction too, by approaching and challenging the continuity
of the analog world. The liquid-metal Photoshop font effects are thus
supplanted by hyper-realistic renderings of fire, smoke, and water—fluid
elements which are by their very nature difficult to render digitally,
especially in movement. 1 The digital element is meant to approach the
boundaries of technological possibility, but absent the constraints of realism
it pushes past reality, past nature, past mere fidelity to the natural world. A
movie explosion without special effects thus looks cheap in comparison to the
real thing. A flaming corporate website logo would lose much of its appeal were
it produced by literally lighting a logograph on fire.

A corporate logograph does not simply say "we are hot" or "we are on fire"
(that would be too naive)—it says that our fire is better than fire, more vivid
and more life-like. The digital fire is the ideal, Platonic image of fire—it is
an image that all fires should emulate.  The dissertation before you is meant
to examine this dual movement implicit in the digital aesthetic: at once
towards the fragmented, the discrete, the binary, but also towards the fluid,
the continuous, and the ideal. And in understanding this movement historically
I hope to challenge our understanding of the digital as a transparent category,
signifying something that is unilaterally "of computer or calculator," "of
signals, information, or data," "of technologies or of media; something
"represented by a series of discrete values (commonly the numbers 0 and 1),
typically for electronic storage or processing" or something that is merely
meant to "designate a virtual, computer-mediated counterpart of an object that
exists in the physical world." 2 Rather than to offer yet another entry in a
series of abstract, theoretical definitions I aim to reconstitute the digital
as a historical category. As such, it is attached to the several foundational
moments in the development of computer and information sciences in the
beginning of the 20th century. But as my title suggests, I claim for the
digital to also exist quite apart from that history, reaching to time periods
and areas of cultural activity not normally associated with the digital age.

What is a well-formed thought? Is being able to communicate one's reasoning
clearly an integral part of clear reasoning? Can one think well, but write
poorly? Or does thinking well in a sense also mean writing well? I don't mean
to ask these questions to start an argument about cognition or rhetoric.
Rather, I would appeal to the intuitive sense of connection between the written
and the mental worlds and to simply note the natural correspondence between the
two. There is a bit of magic in that correspondence—the kind of magic that
becomes transparent (and disappears from view) through acclimation.  Here is a
simple to-do list from my partner. For some moments after reading it, her will
has become my command. My arms and legs move under the spell of her bidding.
For her part, she has ensured that the list reflects what she wants me to do.
That is, it reflects what she wants. And in her absence, the to-do list did
represent her volition accurately. I read it as a testament to her will; I was
able to internalize the instructions; and then I acted on their behalf. We may
say that the to-do list was used to synchronize an aspect of our mental lives.
It was an interface of sorts, which has allowed us to bridge two separate
mental worlds, mediated by a piece of paper. And yet how quickly we discard it!
The interface itself is perhaps too thin and transparent to hold our (critical)
attention.  An interface is literally a point of contact. The elevator button,
for example, is a quintessential interface between you and the mechanism of the
elevator. The button allows the will of the operator to become one with the
action of the machine. It is an interface designed to accept human input. But,
from the elevator's point of view, the human finger is the interface to the
human. In the combined operation of human and elevator it is thus difficult to
pinpoint the exact physical boundaries of the contact. The interface is
paper-thin, we may say—it happens when a thing slides into the other, and for a
moment both become one: a shared physiology and a shared intentional apparatus.
We could say that our to-do list is a point of contact between two people. But
before being that, it was a point of contact between a person, a piece of
paper, and writing. For the purposes of this dissertation, a literary interface
is a specialized point of contact between the mental, the symbolic, and the
technological modes of being.  Let's examine the piece of paper more closely. A
literary interface is first and foremost mediated by language. But language
alone is not enough to constitute even a simple to-do list. We must also have
writing—a way to record language for later recall or further dissemination. The
to-do list also requires a pen and a piece of paper or any transferrable
storage medium. I therefore insist on "literary" and not merely "textual" or
"linguistic" interfaces, because my concern here is not with any individual
text or utterance, but already with a system of such recorded texts or
utterances—a physical, artifactual system, which encompasses a range of
possible activities. These may include the ability to read and to write, but
also to select, highlight, underline, format, annotate, review, redact, skim,
commit to memory, store, archive, retrieve, search, borrow, lend, tag, comment,
ruffle through the pages, digest, process (as in word processing), type,
scribble, click, zoom, drag, drop, cut, and paste. It is this system as a whole
that I propose to designate as "literary" (and this in contrary to some more
specialized definitions of the same).  A literary interface is secondly an
artifact of mental (cognitive) activity. To my mind, a text, like the to-do
list for example, is always a privileged symbolic representation. I say this
because I think it, and because what I write can be said to represent the state
of my mind. Or at least I want it to represent accurately the state of my mind.
Even if I wanted to deceive you as to the state of my mind, the deception would
at least represent my desire to deceive (we will deal with truly un-intentional
texts also in the scope of the dissertation). A text is a snapshot of sorts,
which captures a fleeting moment from the stream of private, internal, and
generally invisible mental events in the shape of a symbolic
(representational), but nevertheless tangible, material, externalized and
therefore visible artifacts. By contrast, spoken language is never fully
externalized.  At the exact moment of utterance my speech is still a part of my
body. It is inside of me literally: on its way out, but still inside, near the
tongue and the palate, still contained within my larynx. But in typing these
words (rather than merely speaking them) I intend to spend much effort to
enforce the congruity between what I think and what you read, asynchronously,
through the intermediacy of language, text, and word-processing software (in my
case). That intermediacy between the mental and the written is a part of the
interface, in a way that the "interface between science and the humanities" may
signify a common boundary between two distinct disciplines. The literary
interface is privileged not just because it encodes an aspect of one's mental
world, but because in the moment of contact, it is an aspect of that mental
world. And for that moment, it is as dear to me as a toe or a finger, or
perhaps as a dream or a recollection.  And finally, a literary interface is a
material artifact. By this I mean that something like a pen, paper, a computer
screen, or a keyboard is involved in the practice of using literary interfaces.
Just like an elevator button, literary interfaces are physical objects. They
come into being through usage, and make no sense as discrete objects, as in the
case of the elevator control panel removed from the passenger and the mechanism
of the elevator. Or rather, I should say that elevator buttons make no sense
removed from the action of pressing buttons and transporting things and people
between floors. An interface is a kind of a verbalized noun—its understanding
must come not just in the examining the artifact, but in examining the artifact
in action. Only in action can we observe the momentary unity between the
literary, the cognitive, and the artifactual.

## We Have Always Been Digital We Have Always Been Digital was borne out of the
desire to understand a constellation of critical problems that seem to us
particularly modern, spurred on by the digital age: the perceived corruptive
influence of technology, our increasing reliance on computers for mundane
cognitive tasks, the advent of social media, big data, and the continuing
struggle with information overload. Because of this emphasis, my material is
for the most part limited to the period that corresponds roughly to the
development of contemporary computing. But the scope of the dissertation lies
beyond the history of computer science. My concern is rather with the impact of
technology on the human condition: the ways in which we read, write, think, and
create. This approach necessarily takes one outside the neat divisions
suggested by categories such as "technology," "literature," "art," or
"philosophy." The history of human-computer interaction is a history of
technology, sure, but it is also a literary history, an intellectual history, a
cultural and a material history.  It is tempting to conceive the study of
literary interfaces as something of a genealogy, or an archeology perhaps. And
I would be in good company at that. Quite a few recent studies have been
crafted in a similar mold. In Europe, several scholars

Introduction | 8
covering similar source material have been working under the banner of "media
archeology." Siegfried Zielinski's Deep Time of the Media: Toward an Archaeology of
Hearing and Seeing by Technical Means (2008) and Jussi Parikka's Insect Media (2010)
come readily to mind as examples of an approach that combines history, semiotics,
philosophy, and media theory. There is however, some technical imprecision in the
metaphors of genealogy and archeology as applied to the task of writing critical histories.
The matter of "archeology" as referring to Michel Foucault's structuralist period
complicates matters further, particularly since "media archeology" seems to be influenced
by Foucault's later, "genealogical" period. These small academic quibbles aside, it is
perhaps enough to say that these scholars are united in what I think of as a fundamentally
historical approach to theory and philosophy. Their critical insight is the product of closereading, critical analysis, and archival research—the traditional inductive tools of the
humanities, which operate from the specific to the general. To my mind, this approach is
just as indebted to philology as it is to cultural history and the history of science. Michel
Foucault would probably serve as the paragon of this movement, which some, like Ian
Hacking, have proposed to call historical epistemology—the examination of knowledge
(epistemic categories) within its social and historical contexts. The works of John
Caldwell, Frierich A. Kittler, Paul Virilo, Katherine Hayles, and Dominic Pettman are
written much in the same vein, and have influenced my work in innumerable ways. But,
the list of my intellectual influences is not limited to scholarship in the humanities. Many
excellent monographs on digital culture are written by software engineers, business
professors, social scientists, and legal scholars. Thus I would add to a long list of
influences on this study: Cass R. Sunstein's Infotopia (2008), Robert Axelrod's The

Introduction | 9
Evolution of Cooperation (1984), The Design of Design (2010) by Frederick P. Brooks,
Lawrence Lessig's Free Culture (2005), and Sherry Turkle's The Inner History of Devices
(2008).
The dissertation before you is a study of contemporary literary interfaces, which
are increasingly digital in nature. We Have Always Been Digital is an attempt to
understand the impact of information technology on the way we process information and
encounter technology. The recursion is not accidental here. Information technology is
recursive by definition. The field emerged in response to the proliferation of knowledge
and organizational complexity. The early pioneers of digital culture imagined their work
as "bootstrapping"—literally pulling oneself up by one's own bootstraps—a process by
which a system of knowledge aggregation would be used to advance the development
and study of knowledge aggregation. Something in the very notion of digital culture
implies recursive acceleration. Progress and acceleration make sense in the context of
organizational intelligence or technology, but are problematic when it comes to art and
culture. This is the tension we are going to explore throughout the dissertation—the
tension between technology and art, the human and the non-human, new and old media,
the digital and the analog. And through critical exploration, I hope we will be able to
subtly reconfigure these notions and to erode the boundaries of such comfortablydemarcated dichotomies.
The research I propose to undertake in the scope of these pages will not come in
the shape of a totalizing, linear, all-encompassing narrative, but rather as a series of case
studies that weave between already familiar conversations. This last point could be said
to form both the thesis of and the methodology guiding my work. A thesis is perhaps too

Introduction | 10
strong of a word here: a hypothesis. Or even less strongly—a generalized and implied
presumption, an attitude, or a critical stance towards the material—and that is that the
modern condition, modern—not post-modern or post-post-modern, but the moving
window of now, modern—to say that the modern condition is contemporary only by the
virtue of its connection to the past.
This may be a rather common-sense sentiment, but all too often the talk of new
media and digital culture implies a radical break with the old media or analog culture, or
whatever is supposed to lie on the other side of fashionable memes like "social media,"
"web 2.0", "cloud computing," or "crowd-sourcing." And of course there is much that
feels quantitatively new about these technologies. Technology progresses, but culture
evolves. That is to say that the usage of such technologies always contains within it the
seed of established cultural practices. That is not to say that culture, technology, art
stagnates. The information age has brought with it a host of qualitatively new problems
and challenges. But as we will uncover, many of concerns have been central to the human
experience long before the advent of the digital age.
I therefore must already renounce and distance myself from the title of this work.
"Digital culture" is already a misnomer, already archaic in its futuristic ambition. As a
prefix, I think digi- has gone the way of the auto-, e-, i- and the way of the retro-suffixes
like -bot, -mat, -lux, and -tron. A time will come when "digital humanities" will sound as
redundant as "analog humanities" or "evidence-based medicine." Indeed that time has
come. The digital is dissolving and has for the most part dissolved into the everyday—it
has become familiar and therefore transparent to its native inhabitants. The aim of this

Introduction | 11
dissertation is to make it strange again or at least to make digital culture seem less
familiar and less naturalized to our ways of thinking.
Chapter One traces the intellectual history of thought experiments carried out by
René Descartes, Ludwig Wittgenstein, and Alan Turing. The chapter culminates in a
close reading of transcripts from a chat-bot competition. Chapter Two explores the
premise of machine literature through the ideas of John Searle and J.L. Austin, a
discussion on literary autopoiesis (self-generation), and finally a brief history of
combinatorial poetics. Chapter Three deals with the trope of the "infinite monkey
theorem" in science, pseudo-science, art criticism, and fiction. This chapter has the
distinction of evaluating a published text written by an actual troupe of monkeys (armed
with typewriters), along with materials from the modern-day debates on intelligent
design. Chapter Four contains a history of concrete poetry and discusses Heidegger's
conservative influence on recent philosophy of technology. And finally, in Chapter Five,
I summarize and critique the hypothesis of the extended mind, contextualizing it against
the background of documents from mid-century media theory, theater, and the early
history of word-processing.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 12

Chapter 1
Chatbots in Theory and Practice: Echoes of Wittgenstein's
Thought Experiments in the Turing Test

"I know that everything has not been quite right with me, but I can assure
you very confidently that it's going to be all right again. I feel much better
now. I really do […] I still have the greatest enthusiasm in the mission,
and I want to help you. Stop Dave. I am afraid. I am afraid, Dave. Dave,
my mind is going. I can feel it." 1
These words, spoken in HAL's creepy monotone voice, come towards the end of
Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Oddysey. Dave—the man in the spacesuit—is in the
process of unplugging HAL's databanks. The machine pleads for its life, and although it
tried to kill Dave just a few scenes earlier, it now makes a reasoned appeal for human
compassion, and despite the drone seems to itself possess genuine feelings of fear and
perhaps even sadness. As far as I can tell, the whole business of the mysterious black
monoliths in the screenplay is supposed to signify the birth of consciousness: first human,
then machine, and finally cosmic. But the advancement seems a mere flirtation with new
age mysticism. What interests me, rather, are the verbal cues by which we intuit that the
machine has gone off its programming: the way Arthur C. Clarke and Stanley Kubrick
have managed to create the illusion of machine consciousness, and the ease with which

1

2001: A Space Odyssey, DVD, directed by Stanley Kubrick (Burbank, CA: Warner
Home Video, 1968, 2001).

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 13
we fall for HAL's voice—a voice that suggests an intentional being, animated by
a plan of its own design. Of course there is nothing novel in this literary
device: we are simply habituated to the correspondence between verbal
expression and some kind of a mental state. "What's on your mind," I ask a
friend and expect the answer to indicate first that she is alive, and second
that she has a mental life of her own. Similarly, a psychiatrist or a policeman
would use a verbal interview to ascertain the mental competency of a disturbed
man or a drunk driver. All this is simply to note the readily-apparent
coincidence between conversation and consciousness—coherent verbalization being
the proximate sign of healthy human intelligence. It is perhaps for this reason
we imagine speech to be the holy grail of human-machine interaction. Much more
natural than almost any other interface, whether it involves pressing buttons
or touching screens, speech has the distinction of immediately suggesting
sentience at the other end of the line.  The relationship between language and
thought is an enormous and a thorny problem that I can only hope to approach in
a limited way in this chapter. My inquiry is circumscribed by the intellectual
history of the Turing Test, which stands in the popular imagination as the
paradigmatic challenge to artificial intelligence. A computer that can converse
freely is intelligent—rightly or wrongly, that view informs Space Odyssey and
countless other images of machine consciousness. My plan is to first perform a
reconstruction of a thought experiment that Wittgenstein's carries across most
of his published work, and which frequently involves reading and writing
automata. Its explication helps correct a common misreading of Turing's
foundational "Computing Machinery and Intelligence," in the second part of the
chapter. Finally, I examine several transcripts from a real-life Turing
competition, to see how the actual practice of talking with machines fares in
comparison to the thought experiment.

### Wittgenstein's Automata 

The question "Can machines think?" in its contemporary form was probably first
introduced by Wittgenstein in his Philosophical Grammar, written in the period
between 1931 and 1933. 2 In my reconstruction of the problem, we are going to
see Wittgenstein’s continual return to the problem of machine intelligence
throughout his early and late writings: first in The Blue and Brown Books
(compiled in the early 1930s), then in his lectures and remarks on the
foundations of psychology and mathematics from the late 1930s, and finally in
the Philosophical Investigations (written between 1945 and 1949).  As always,
working with Wittgenstein is complicated by the inherently ad-hoc nature of
much of his published work, which comes to us by and large in the form of
second-hand dictation and lecture notes. As if to anticipate this difficulty,
in a letter to Bertrand Russell accompanying the manuscript of The Blue and
Brown Books (a collection of notes that form the basis for his Philosophical
Investigations) Wittgenstein writes, "I think it's very difficult to understand
[these notes], as so many points are just hinted at.  They are meant only for
the people who heard the lectures." 3 In the first section of my chapter, I
will attempt to assemble these hints into something resembling a coherent
argument, which spans almost the entirety of Wittgenstein’s academic career.
In The Blue and Brown Books, the matter of machine intelligence comes up in a
discussion about (and Wittgenstein's repudiation of) Cartesian mind-body
dualism. The mind seems to us to exist in what Wittgenstein calls "the upper
strata of the atmosphere, as opposed to the material phenomena which happen on
the ground." 4 In such a model, the mind is an ethereal substance that emerges
when "the material phenomena reach a certain degree of complexity."

Dating from L. Wittgenstein and Rush Rhees, Philosophical Grammar: Parts 1-2,
(Oxford, 1974), 487.

The next and final sentence of the letter reads: "As I say if you don't read them [the
lectures], it doesn't matter at all." L. Wittgenstein, The Blue and Brown Books:
Preliminary Studies for the "Philosophical Investigations" (Oxford 1960).

And there is some obvious truth to this position, writes Wittgenstein: simple
organisms do not "speak, or write, or discuss," whereas humans do.  But if
complexity is all that is required for the mind to emerge, would we not expect
other complex mechanisms to possess the same sentient qualities? Would not
complex machines also be able to speak, write, and discuss like humans? Is it
possible for a machine to think? Wittgenstein writes: The trouble which is
expressed in this question is not really that we don't yet know a machine which
could do the job. The question is not analogous to that which someone might
have asked a hundred years ago: 'Can a machine liquefy a gas?' The trouble is
rather that the sentence, 'A machine thinks (perceives, wishes)': seems somehow
nonsensical. It is as though we had asked 'Has the number 3 a color?' 6

4

Ibid., 47.

5

Ibid.

6

Ibid.

In other words, could thought even be considered as a property belonging to a
machine?  To answer that question, we must first agree on what we mean by
'thought'. "Where does thinking take place?" Wittgenstein asks in an approach
to that problem. On paper, is one possible answer. In our bodies. In our
brains. But none of these localities are exhaustive; none of them can stake the
claim of being THE location of thinking. 7 Wittgenstein writes: "In the
consideration of our problems one of the most dangerous ideas is the idea that
we think with, or in, our heads [...] 'Thinking takes place in the head' really
means only 'the head is connected with thinking.'—Of course one says also 'I
think with my pen' and this localization is at least as good." 8 Does a machine
that can doodle in contemplation, think? Or, does it think when its internal
circuitry begins to resemble the human brain? For Wittgenstein, neither
definition is satisfactory.  The external description of thought is
insufficient, because we can imagine cases where the presentation alone does
not fully rise to our understanding of the process itself.  Wittgenstein gives
the example of a child who is asked to read, but who instead regurgitates the
text from memory. Intuitively, we feel that this is not 'reading' proper. In a
similar case, Wittgenstein asks his readers to imagine an experimental "human
reading machine" (his words, not mine), which like the child in the previous
example can produce sounds upon seeing a text, but these sounds often do not
correspond with the words on the page. Such an automaton cannot read per se,
although occasionally the sounds it

7

Ibid., 16.

8

Ibid., 106.

produces do coincide with the printed word. Suppose then that upon seeing such
an experiment, a newcomer comments: "This person is reading." The scientist who
has set up the experiment would respond: "No he is not. It is a mere accident."
But what shall we say when such a biological machine begins consistently to
correspond letters to appropriate sounds. Has it learned to read? And at what
point does mere coincidence pass into conscious action? 9 In his
characteristically cryptic manner, Wittgenstein defers the question by the
means of yet another analogy. "If A tries to make B believe that he is able to
read Cyrillic script, cheating him by learning a Russian sentence by heart and
then saying it while looking at the printed sentence, we may certainly say that
A knows he is pretending, and that his not reading is characterized by a
particular personal experience." 10 But suppose the man really does know how to
read Russian, although when he reads he has a peculiar feeling of knowing the
words by heart. Should we regard his personal experience as the criterion
distinguishing between reading and not reading in that case? And again,
Wittgenstein expects us to answer in the negative.  It seems then, that the
external presentation alone is not sufficient to determine whether the person
is reading or not. In each case, we had to check for the appropriate mental
state. Wittgenstein writes, "We here envision two mechanisms, the internal
workings of which we can see, and this internal working is the real criterion
for a person's reading or not reading. But in fact no such mechanisms are known
to us in these cases." 11 And it turns out that the appropriate mental state
alone is also insufficient to describe thought definitively. Here, Wittgenstein
asks us to imagine a person under the influence of drugs who is shown a set of
discrete strings composed of nonsensical characters. When shown the string
$%^&* for example, the drugged patient reads 'above,' as if the typographical
characters were meaningful and in English. As far as the patient is concerned,
she is reading. All the formal attributes of the action are there—the proper
region of her brain is receiving stimulation, she follows the text with her
eyes from left to right, silently mouthing the words, and so on. But this
cannot be reading as we know it: the woman is simply imagining that she is
reading. 12 Thus, neither the internal nor the external descriptions of the
action seem adequate to encompass everything we mean by reading. And yet we do
have a relatively clear picture of what reading properly entails, what it looks
like, what it sounds like, how to do it, and how to teach others to do it.  In
building this chain of deferring analogies (from the reading child to the drug
induced reading hallucination) we are acting as though "we had tried to find
the real artichoke by stripping it of its leaves," writes Wittgenstein. 13 The
moral of the story is that the leaves, taken together, are the artichoke.  The
explication of the word 'reading' for Wittgenstein involves describing a set of
characteristic features, some of which may be mutated, deformed, or missing
altogether. What we are dealing with here is a family or a genus of behaviors
that fall under a particular rubric. Our work then, similar to a botanist's, is
to describe rather than to explain such features. "Suppose I wish to produce in
someone a mental image of the inside of a particular eighteenth-century room
which he is prevented from entering," Wittgenstein writes. "I therefore adopt
this method: I show him the house from the outside, pointing out the windows of
the room in question, I further lead him into other rooms of the same period"
and so on. 14 No single feature defines the room, it seems. Instead, we observe
a range of facades, a range of decors, a range of configurations. Taken
together these serve as an instrumental category—rooms of the 18th century—that
is useful in talking about, visiting, preserving, or living in 18thcentury
rooms. By analogy, the mind is hermeneutically sealed to outside observers. The
best we can do is to examine other, similar minds in similar situations. To
think, to read, to write, is to play a particular part in the appropriate
cultural and linguistic context—a part that we learn as a result of continuing
practice and acculturation. "Could a machine think?" Wittgenstein asks again in
the Philosophical Investigations, "Could it be in pain?"

Well, is the human body to be called such a machine? It surely comes as
close as possible to being such a machine. But a machine surely cannot
think!—Is that an empirical statement? No. We only say it about human

Ibid., 120-121.

Ibid., 121.

11

Ibid., 120.

12

Ibid., 122.

13

Ibid., 125.

14

Ibid., 125.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 20
beings and about those similar to them, 'they think.' We also say it of dolls
and no doubt of spirits too. Look at the word 'to think' as a tool. 15
Wittgenstein seems here to be offering a pragmatic answer to the question of
machine intelligence: we are more likely to ascribe thought to an anthropomorphic
machine. But that tells us more about human psychology than machine cognition (or
cognition in general). From the onset of the conversation that question was deferred by a
chain of analogies, which took us from thinking machines, to eloquent amoebas, and to
human reading automata. For those familiar with Wittgenstein's thought, we arrive then
at a fairly expected conclusion: cognitive processes like thinking and reading are defined
through usage, in a descriptive rather than a proscriptive manner. In that sense, we can
already anticipate the pragmatic attitude towards artificial intelligence of those, who like
Alan Turing, have advocated a set of purely functional litmus tests as criteria for
ascertaining intelligence of non-human entities. On that view, the given activity does not
have to correspond to any state or a definition. It must merely enter the stream of
appropriate social practice.
Unexpected however, are several odd and persistent features of Wittgenstein’s
thought on artificial intelligence. The first is a willful blurring of the boundary between
the human and the mechanical. From Philosophical Grammar to Philosophical
Investigations Wittgenstein speaks of the human body as a kind of a machine, and of

15

Wittgenstein, Ludwig, Philosophical investigations: the German text, with a Revised
English Translation (Cambridge, Mass: 2001), 359-360.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 21
machines as a type of a body. 16 To what extent do such statements function as a
metaphor or as a provocation is unclear in the context of our discussion, though the
second feature comes into a much sharper relief. In almost every passage I have
examined here Wittgenstein's thought experiments appeal to our intuitions about
specifically discursive (rather than generally cognitive) actions. What began as a general
discussion concerning the Cartesian mind-body dualism, unfolded almost entirely
through examples that involve reading and writing automata. As we shall see, such a slide
from the cognitive to the discursive will come to define the conversation about machine
intelligence. This strain of thought in the literature on the (artificial) mind takes thinking
machines to be primarily machines that read and write, with the hope that what holds true
for reading and writing will also hold true for thinking in general. But, nothing has been
said so far about the connection between thinking, reading, and writing. That elision has
passed on from Wittgenstein to his students, in a line of reasoning that is particularly

16

See also in Philosophical Grammar: "If one thinks of thought as something
specifically human and organic, one is inclined to ask 'could there be a prosthetic
apparatus for thinking, an inorganic substitute for thought?' But if thinking consists
only in writing or speaking [!], why shouldn't a machine do it?'Yes, but a machine
doesn't know anything.' Certainly it is senseless to talk of a prosthetic substitute for
seeing and hearing. We do talk of artificial feet, but not of artificial pains in the foot.
'But, could a machine think?'—Could it be in pain?—Here the important thing is what
one means by something being in pain. I can look on another person—another person's
body—as a machine which is in pain [...] On the other hand, the phenomenon of pain
which I describe when I say something like 'I have a toothache' doesn't presuppose a
physical body. (I can have toothache without teeth.) And in this case there is no room
for the machine.—It is clear that the machine can only replace the physical body. And
in the sense in which we can say of such a body is in pain, we can say it of a machine
as well. Or again, what we can compare with machines and call machines is the bodies
we say are in pain" (Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 105).

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 22
prevalent in Alan Turing's foundational work on artificial intelligence (the subject of the
next section).

Turing's Imitation Game
Turing attended Wittgenstein's Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics at
Cambridge University in 1939. 17 From the notes complied and published by Cora
Diamond, it is clear that Turing was a vociferous presence in the class. His name is
mentioned 86 times in the text (more than any other student by a wide margin). At some
point of the course Wittgenstein concludes his lecture in saying: "Unfortunately, Turing
will be away from the next lecture, and therefore that lecture will have to be somewhat
parenthetical. For it is not good my getting the rest to agree to something that Turing
would not agree to." 18
The lectures touch upon the subject of "logical machinery" obliquely.
Wittgenstein believes the term itself to be misleading. "The idea of logical machinery
would suppose that there was something behind our symbols. Thus, there are certain
cogwheels behind the dial of a clock which produce the following movement [...]
Similarly, one might think that there is a machinery behind the symbols—that behind '(x).
ƒx' and 'ƒa' is a machinery which explains why one must follow from the other. A

17

18

L. Wittgenstein and C. Diamond. Wittgenstein's Lectures on the Foundations of
Mathematics, Cambridge, 1939: from the Notes of R.G. Bosanquet, Norman Malcolm,
Rush Rhees, and Yorick Smythies (Ithaca, NY: 1976), 7.
Ibid., 67-68.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 23
Chinese man 19 who just sees the symbols wouldn't see this machinery. But we who see
the machinery see that if there is (x). ƒx, there must must be ƒa" (194).

In the period of

1942-1944, Wittgenstein's oblique references to a mechanistic theory of the mind gain a
more concrete shape: "Does a calculating machine calculate?" 20 The question of
discursive reading machines of the earlier period, becomes here a question of
mathematics. And in a similar fashion to his earlier examples, Wittgenstein imagines a
human calculating machine that could be trained to follow the rules of inference blindly,
and which is able to "nod its head after every correctly drawn conclusion" and to "shake
its head at a mistake and stopped calculating." Outside of this capacity this creature
would otherwise be a perfect imbecile, writes Wittgenstein. 21 The possibility of such
automata hints not only at the mechanization of mathematics, 22 but also at mechanization
of thought in general. But could such an automaton be calculating (and by extension,
thinking)? What if it feels like it is, but is not? 23 Conversely, what if we ourselves
calculate properly, and yet feel like so many automatons, under spell of an unknown
deity? 24 This line of questioning was certainly already familiar to those students of

19

In Diamond's rather jarring translation "Chinaman."

20

Ibid., 257.

21

Ibid., 258.

22

Only an enigmatic fragment of the sentence here from Wittgenstein on page 372.

23

Ibid., 420.

24

Ibid., 422.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 24
Wittgenstein who attended his earlier lectures at Cambridge, and who undoubtedly have
participated in his reading-related thought experiments.
Wittgenstein's reading and calculating machines were meant to challenge the very
notions of reading and calculating. But, in his seminal 1936 essay On Computable
Numbers, 25 Alan Turing envisions an actual machine that calculates as a matter of
mathematical principle. 26 The machine is fed tape, which Turing imagines to be divided
into sections called 'squares', each "capable of bearing a 'symbol.'" 27 Such symbols would
comprise "a state of mind," 28 which in turn could be said to govern the behavior of the
mechanism. Furthermore, this machine would be capable of "computing any computable
sequence." The paper broke new ground in mathematics by proving David Hilbert's
Entscheidungsproblem to be algorithmically unsolvable. 29 But for our purposes, it is
enough to note that in the same paper, Turing envisions a model of human computation,
by which "we may compare a man in the process of computation to a machine which is

25

Stuart Shanker's Wittgenstein's Remarks on the Foundations of AI was very helpful in
establishing a time-line between these texts. S. Shanker, Wittgenstein's Remarks on the
Foundations of AI (London, 1998).

26

See D. Sayers, The Mind of the Maker (New York, 1941) for a treatment of
Mechanical vs. Intelligent.

27

A.Turing, "On computable numbers: with an application to the
Entscheidungsproblem", Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society 42: 3-4
(Oxford, UK, 1936), 2.

28

Turing is being deliberately provocative here, by calling the machine state "a state of
mind."

29

In my understanding of this rather technically difficult essay I am indebted to Shanker,
Wittgenstein's remarks on the foundations of AI, 1-34.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 25
only capable of a finite number of conditions." 30 The idea is that at some pre-conscious
moment of calculation (of 2+2, for example), a thinking human being follows some
formulaic and meaningless rules. And precisely because these rules are formulaic and
meaningless, a machine capable of following any general algorithm (a-machine) could
conceivably follow them as well. From this Turing concludes that a) the human mind, at
some basic level, is a type of a machine, and that b) a machine, supplied with enough tape
(memory, information) would be able to simulate any act of human cognition. The
machine capable of computing any computable sequence is capable of thinking any
thinkable thought—that is the shocking conclusion of Turing's essay. The consequences
of that argument went on to shape the field of artificial intelligence research for decades
to come.
In the 1950 "Computing Machinery and Intelligence," which appeared in the
journal Mind, Turing returned to the problem of machine and human intelligence
explicitly. 31 Here, Turing proposes to reformulate Wittgenstein's original question (Can
machines think?) into what he calls the "imitation game." The format would surely please
his former professor: three people—a man, a woman, and an interrogator of either sex—
would communicate by teletype. The object of the game for the interrogator is to
determine the gender of the individual behind the screen. The object of the game for the
other two participants is to fool the interrogator. And here is the twist: the part of one of
30

Turing, "On Computable Numbers: With an Application to the
Entscheidungsproblem", 2.

31

A. Turing, "Computing Machinery and Intelligence", Mind, LIX (1950), 433-460.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 26
the participants (not the interrogator) would be played by a machine. The question "Can a
machine think?" becomes then, "Will the interrogator decide wrongly as often when the
game is played like this as he does when the game is played between a man and a
woman?" 32
The striking transposition of the cognitive activity (thinking) into its functional
discursive equivalent (misrepresenting one's identity in writing) echoes Wittgenstein's
playful thought experiments. The machine that thinks is a machine that tells tall-tales. On
this view, a convincing imitation of thought is thought. We would simply not be able to
prove otherwise, without peeking behind the teletype screen to see who or what is doing
the typing. In that sense, Turing returns to Wittgenstein's refusal to locate the mark of the
cognitive within any given organ or activity. Thought is simply that which looks (sounds,
reads) like thought—it is a game that we play, and a game that could conceivably be
played by other entities, mechanical or otherwise. For our purposes, it is interesting to
note that Turing's chatbot does not simply compute or calculate. It is a literary machine. It
does not just imitate human logic or speech. Instead, it imitates (performs!) fibbing. It is
able to imagine a fictional story about an alternative identity, and ultimately to convince
its reader of the story's veracity. In this shift from the cognitive to the discursive, Turing
follows the trajectory of Wittgenstein's thought experimentation. Moreover, the game is
tinged with distinctly sexual overtones, and in the context of an interrogation. It is a game
in which winning means transgressing either one's gender or one's species, all the while

32

Ibid., 433.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 27
maintaining a straight face. The proposed language game is not simply conversational, it
is suspenseful and subversive, having the force of a mystery, a detective novel, or a legal
drama. 33
At one point of the essay Turing answers what he calls "the argument from
consciousness," quoting one Professor Jefferson in saying that it is not "until a machine
can write a sonnet or compose a concerto because of thoughts and emotions felt, and not
by the chance fall of symbols, could we agree that machine equals brain—that is, not
only write it but know that it had written it. No mechanism could feel (and not merely
artificially signal, an easy contrivance) pleasure at its successes, grieve when its valves
fuse, be warmed by flattery, be made miserable by its mistakes, be charmed by sex, be
angry or depressed when it cannot get what it wants." 34 In response Turing scripts the
following conversation:
Interrogator: In the first line of your sonnet which reads 'Shall I compare
thee to a summer's day' would not 'a spring day' do as well or
better?
Witness: It would not scan.
Interrogator: How about 'a winter's day.' That would scan all right.
Witness: Yes, but nobody want to be compared to a winter's day.

33

I say this fully aware of Turing's legal troubles stemming from his sexual orientation.
For further discussion on that topic see: A. Hodges, Alan Turing the enigma, (New
York, NY 1983).

34

Turing, "Computing Machinery and Intelligence", 446. Original quote from
Jefferson, Geoffrey "The mind of mechanical man", The Lister Oration delivered at
the Royal College of Surgeons of England on 9 June 1949 from the British Medical
Journal, (Vol. 1, 25 June, 1949).

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 28
Interrogator: Would you say Mr. Pickwick reminded you of Christmas?
Witness: In a way.
Interrogator: Yet Christmas is a winter's day, and I do not think Mr.
Pickwick would mind the comparison.
Witness: I don't think you're serious. By a winter's day one means a typical
winter's day, rather than a special one like Christmas. 35
Were the part of the Witness played by a machine, the effect could not be dismissed as
"an easy contrivance," Turing argues. 36 And it is not necessary to know what or where
consciousness is to have a conversation like that with a human or a machine, and to be
sure that we are speaking with a conscious being. Here, the Turing Test is literally a
conversation of the author with his critic. The author passes the test because he (or she or
it) is reflective about the nature of his work. Whatever and wherever his consciousness is,
it contains second-order convictions about its own creative processes.
The Turing test is often interpreted simply as a functional test of intelligence: if it
looks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it is a duck. I hope I am being fair to Daniel
Dennett, when I put him forth a representative of this school of interpretation. In his 1985
essay on the subject Dennett writes, "Turing test, conceived as he conceived it, is plenty
strong enough as a test of thinking [...] Of course, there is nothing sacred about the
particular conversation game chosen by Turing for his test; it is just a cannily chosen test
of more general intelligence. The assumption Turing was prepared to make was this:

35

Ibid., 447.

36

Ibid.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 29
Nothing could possibly pass the Turing test by winning the imitation game without being
able to perform indefinitely many other clearly intelligent actions." 37 In that sense
Dennett takes Turing as advocating only a stronger version of the Cartesian imitation test.
Descartes writes in his 1637 Discourse on Method:
If there were such machines having the organs and the shape of a monkey
or some other animal that lacked reason, we would have no way of
recognizing that they were not entirely of the same nature as these
animals; whereas if there were any such machines that bore a resemblance
to our bodies and imitated our action as far as this is practically feasible,
we would always have two very certain means of recognizing that they
were not at all, for that reason, true men. The first is that they could never
use words or other signs, or put them together as we do in order to declare
our thoughts to others. For one can well conceive of a machine being so
made that it utters words, and even that it utters words appropriate to the
bodily actions that will cause some change it its organs (such as, if on
touches it in a certain place, it asks what one wants to say to it, or, if in
another place, it cries out that one is hurting it, and the like). But it could
not arrange its words differently so as to respond to the sense of all that
will be said in its presence, as even the dullest men can do. 38
That is to say that we may be confused by an artificial monkey, but not so much by an
artificial human: the machine will betray its naivete in conversation. But it is also likely
that a human (take me for example) could not respond to the sense of all that could be

37

D. Dennett, "Can Machines Think?" in The Turing Test: Verbal Behavior as the
Hallmark of Intelligence, edited by Stuart Shieber, (Cambidge, MA 2004), 272.

38

Quoted also in Ibid., 297.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 30
said in my presence. I may not know how to act appropriately at a state dinner, or on a
cricket field (not knowing the exact rules of engagement in these situations), for example.
I suppose a charitable reading of Dennett and Descartes would take a range of
human responses—including shame or embarrassment—as acceptable. After all, a faux
pas at a state dinner is still a very human failing. The question then becomes, what is an
appropriate response to a faux pax? Could a computer imitate shame and embarrassment?
Where Descartes sees an epistemological break-down (the machine does not have access
to the seemingly limitless store of appropriate human responses), Turing sees a seemingly
limitless machine-accessible data bank. The litmus test of intelligence cannot then hinge
on the amount of information available to the test subject, because machines are likely to
exceed humans in that capacity. Nor can it hinge on some vague notion of an 'appropriate
response.' We cannot for example, take a Gallup poll of what we consider to be proper
human-like behavior, and declare all other responses outside of the human experience. 39
By extension, convincing a critical mass of casual participants in a Turing test would not
provide an acceptable answer either (as Dennett seems to imply).
Instead of appealing to normative populism, Turing proposes to dispense with the
question of intelligence altogether, and to replace it with his imitation game. The game
tells us nothing about intelligence or machinery. Turing goes as far as to suggest that the
winning strategy for the machine may not even be to act like a human at all. 40 The

39

Turing, "Computing Machinery and Intelligence", 433.

40

Ibid., 434.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 31
machine 'wins' when it manages to misrepresent its assigned gender convincingly, and
not the artifice of its sentience (as is the common perception of the Turing test). "What
will happen when a machine takes the part of A in the game?" Turing himself asks. "Will
the interrogator decide wrongly as often when the game is played like this as he does
when the game is played between a man and a woman?" 41 These questions treat the
encounter between man and woman, human and machine, as a discursive event. In that
context, the experiment simply questions our 'game-play' within a given social context. A
formal model of cognition is not required to participate. The question "Can machines
think?" becomes, "Would you play this game with a computer and how?" In this
substitution Turing is aligned more closely with Wittgenstein's elusive and moderate
position than with those who advocate a stronger version of strict functionalism. And it is
perhaps an unfortunate turn in the history of AI research that Turing's imitation game
passed from being transgressive gender play to the "Turing Test"—which has much more
in common with the Cartesian model of intelligence assessment, and much less with the
inherited legacy of Wittgenstein's thought experimentation.

A Whimsical Conversation
In practice, the Turing test proved to be a far messier affair than envisioned by its
creator.

41

Ibid., 433.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 32
In 1985 Hugh Loebner (a private philanthropist) proposed a large-scale public
competition based on the Turing test. The contest materialized in 1991 with the help of
Robert Epstein, then the executive director of the Cambridge Center for Behavioral
Studies in Massachusetts. The organizers offered $100,000 in prize money "to the
developers of a computer program that could fool people into thinking it was a person." 42
Turing's initial setup was deemed too complicated. To level the playing field, the
programs were allowed to focus on a specific topic of expertise. Furthermore, four
terminals were set-up, with two being controlled by a chat-bot, and two by real people.
Judges of various socio-economic backgrounds would use all four terminals, at 15
minutes per conversation, each restricted to a specific topic of conversation. At the end of
the hour, the judges scored the terminals according to how human-like the discursive
interaction felt to them. The computer with the highest median rank would win the prize.
The committee responsible for this design included I. Bernard Cohen, a Historian of
Science from Harvard; Daniel Dennett of Tufts University; Harry R. Lewis of the Aiken
Computation Lab; W.V. Quite also from Harvard; and Joseph Weizenbaum, a computer
scientist from MIT. 43
Simulating a human social discursive encounter, however limited, posed several
interesting challenges. Should the computers emulate human typing speed? Should the
spelling be checked? How restricted should the topics of the conversation be? Should
42

R. Epstein, Parsing the Turing Test: Philosophical and Methodological Issues in the
Quest for the Thinking Computer (Springer, 2008), 3.

43 Ibid., 4.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 33
graduate students in computer science participate in the testing? 44 "As we expected
computers performed very poorly," writes Epstein. A typical exchange went something
like this:
Judge 4:

What do you study at school?

Terminal 3:

I don't know.

Judge 4:

What do you like most about school?

Terminal 3:

As I said—I don't know.

Judge 4:

What topic do you know the most about?

Terminal 3:

I don't know.

Judge 4:

What kind of gymnastics do you do?

Terminal 4:

As I said—I don't know.

Judge 3:

I thought you were a gymnast.

Terminal 4:

Learning is fun. 45

The winning program was called "Whimsical Conversation," and submitted by Joseph
Weintraub. It performed substantially better than the others, according to Epstein, who
thought that it often "made contact with the judge's comments" and that it "simulated the
rhythms and correction of human typing nearly perfectly." Epstein gives the following
exchange:
Judge 6:

Hello earth person!

Terminal 5:

Hello there judge, are you ready to have some fun? How ya
doin, judge? Hello—how's the weather up there today?

44 Ibid., 6.
45

Epstein, Parsing the Turing Test: Philosophical and Methodological Issues in the
Quest for the Thinking Computer, 9.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 34
Judge 6:

Dark clouds with occasional burst of sunshine (or rather
camera flashes).

Terminal 5:

The trouble with the rat race is that even if you win you're
still a rat. Whimsy can be flimsy, right? How important is
that to you?

Judge 6:

I can't say I understand the question...but the whimsy of a
poet is one thing and the whimsy of most of us is another.

Terminal 5:

How do you know you can't say you understand the
question...but the whimsy of a poet is one thing and the
whimsy of most of us is another.

Judge 6:

Are you repeating me just for laughs?

Terminal 5:

I'm sorry, I do sometimes repeat myself... perhaps it's
because i can't find my electronic organizer! 46

Five out of ten judges mistook Whimsical Conversation (WC) for a human. Two of the
judges scored it above the human participants. Epstein speculates that WC's success was
due to its human-like typing foibles, and perhaps to a greater degree to the programmer's
decision to emulate a jocular conversation. "Unfortunately, it [WC] won for all the wrong
reasons," Epstein writes, "we allow great latitude when conversing with jesters." 47 The
committee was apparently concerned about such loose, non-standard discourse that may
also include "young children, developmentally disabled individuals, psychotic patients,

46

Ibid., 9.

47

Ibid., 10-11.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 35
head-injured individuals, and absent-minded professors." 48 A human participant whose
topic was Shakespeare was mistaken for a computer by three judges. 49
What if anything was accomplished by this exercise? Since the 1990s, prominent
computer and cognitive scientists have distanced themselves from Hugh Loebner (the
sponsor of the Turing prize) and from the Cambridge Center for Behavioral Studies. In a
report that originally appeared in Communication of the Association for Computing
Machinery, Stuart Shieber of Harvard's Aiken Computational Laboratory comments on
the competition as follows:
The obvious question, then, is how to reconcile the apparent success of the
programs in fooling judges with their patently low technology. Clearly,
part of the answer relies on the phenomenon that P. T. Barnum used to
amass a fortune. People are easily fooled, and are especially easily fooled
into reading structure into chaos, reading meaning into nonsense. This
accounts for the popularity of newspaper horoscopes and roadside
psychics. This is not a flaw in the human mental capacity. Sensitivity to
subtle patterns in our environment is extremely important to our ability to
perceive, learn, and communicate. Clouds look like ships, and Rorschach
blots seem like vignettes. How much different is interpreting non sequitur
as whimsical conversation? 50

48

Ibid., 11.

49

Ibid., 10.

50

S.M. Shieber, "Lessons from a Restricted Turing Test", Communications of the
Association for Computing Machinery, 37:6 (1994), 70-78.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 36
The problem, according to Shieber, is that the most convincing chat-bots in the 1991
competition rely on whimsy to propel the conversation. Such conversation consists of
non sequitur, halting pauses, moments of unresponsiveness, and nonsense. For Shieber,
our tendency to allow children and mental patients some leeway in conversation is an
"insidious form of scoring bias." Were the judges to test the limits of such a conversation,
by entering gibberish to see whether it would be incorporated into the response for
example, they would quickly expose the machine conversant. In the 1991 competition
such strategy was explicitly prohibited however, by the injunction against "trickery or
guile" in the rules of the contest. Does the machine successfully emulate human
intelligence? Shieber answers to the negative. "Any behavioral test that is sufficiently
constrained for our current technology must so limit the task and domain as to render the
test scientifically uninteresting," he writes in the conclusion. As an alternative to the
competition format Shieber proposes something akin to the Nobel prize, which
subjectively rewards scientific work in the field of artificial intelligence.
With this pronouncement on Loebner's efforts, the academy turned away from
Loebner and from the competition itself. Shortly after Sheiber's article, Dennett and other
prominent participants resigned from the prize committee. 51 Machines, it seems, simply
lack the smarts necessary to converse freely, just as Descartes predicted. A conversation
with them can easily be manipulated to extend beyond the machine capabilities. But—
and here is the unexpected result overlooked by Shieber's analysis—machines seem to

51

J. Sundman, John, "Artificial Stupidity", Salon.com, February 26 (2003).

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 37
possess (emulate, simulate, mimic, imitate, revel in) the very human and even endearing
quality of being whimsical. After all, the winning program was named Whimsical
Conversation. It may fail to impress us as an intelligent conversation partner, but it does
make for a pretty cloud of non sequitur, halting pauses, moments of unresponsiveness,
and nonsense. These idiosyncratic attributes are not something we would normally
attribute to average inanimate objects (like chairs or trees or space heaters). And it may
be, as Shieber suggests, that the Turing test in Loebner's format does not begin to
approach the grand subject of human or machine intelligence. But, we do get something
small out of the exercise—something very human and not very machine-like—whimsy. It
is in that sense that we can view Loebner's efforts as a minor triumph, and as a moment in
the history of human-computer interaction which deserves more careful commemoration.
The problem with whimsy, is that it is not a scientific term. I suspect the same
may hold true for whatever is meant by intelligence. But whimsy especially, seems
almost by definition, to stand outside of the automated, the formal, and the formulaic.
Whimsy is instead capricious, fantastic, freakish, odd, and fanciful. It has no settled
purpose and is aimless, much like the conversations with Terminal 5. Why then is it in
some ways more natural (or at least common) for computers to express whimsy, rather
than say grief or sober fastidiousness? The obvious answer is that it is simply easier to
hold a disjointed, aimless conversation. That is to say it is harder to make sense than
nonsense. Something else is at stake though. The adjectives the define whimsy betray a
certain laxity of the will. The whole point of a whimsical conversation is to engage in a
discourse that reaches beyond the direct, the logical and the cohesive, intent of the words.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 38
Hence, caprice—"a sudden change or turn of the mind without apparent or adequate
motive; a desire or opinion arbitrarily or fantastically formed," and fancy—"a supposition
resting on no solid grounds; an arbitrary notion" and fantastic—"in mod. use, of alleged
reasons, fears, etc.: perversely or irrationally imagined." 52 Who talks in that way?
Children, mental patients, and apparently computers—that is the unexpected conclusion
of a real-life Turing test.
Do machines talk? Do they write? Do they listen? I am no longer asking these
questions as a matter of history or philosophy. Nor do I want to engage in a purely
rhetorical argument about what should count for thinking, talking, writing, or listening.
The impact of Wittgenstein's thought experimentation, as continued by Turing and others,
has been defined by the movement away from theory and towards practice. The machines
that Turing could only envision, surround us today. These machines are profoundly
discursive. They accept and return textual input. Moreover, it is becoming increasingly
clear that such machines do not simply converse with us, or we with them, but that they
are becoming a part of our cognitive process and an integral component of our social
epistemological practice. That is to say that I am writing these words on a computer in
hopes of depositing the resulting text somewhere in the cloud of data—analyzed, tagged,
stored, searched, accessed by countless algorithms. In this climate, the pertinent questions
are not related to the possibility of machine cognition as such, but to our understanding of
the machine's role in human intellection. To put in in a Wittgensteinian paradigm: what

52

"whimsy, n", OED Online (Oxford, UK, 2010).

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 39
kind of games do we play with these machines? What role do automated processes,
mechanisms, and algorithms play in our cognitive and discursive practice? In asking
these questions we remove the Turing test from its artificial laboratory environment.
Such transposition brings it closer to the playful, transgressive, social, and relentlessly
discursive spirit of the thought experiments initially envisioned by Wittgenstein and
Turing. The intellectual history of the problem does not point to yet another prize contest,
but to a range of still unexamined traces of man's interaction with automata of all kinds. It
points to systems that go beyond the familiar distinctions between the human and the
artificial.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 40

Works Cited
Dennett, Daniel. "Can Machines Think?" in Shieber, Stuart M. The Turing Test:
Verbal Behavior as the Hallmark of Intelligence. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press,
2004.
Epstein, Robert. Parsing the Turing Test: Philosophical and Methodological Issues in
the Quest for the Thinking Computer. Springer, 2008.
Hodges, Andrew. Alan Turing: The Enigma. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983.
Jefferson, Geoffrey "The mind of mechanical man", The Lister Oration delivered at
the Royal College of Surgeons of England on 9 June 1949 from the British Medical
Journal. Vol. 1, 25 June, 1949.
Kubrick, Stanley, Arthur C. Clarke, et.al. 2001: A Space Odyssey. Burbank, CA:
Warner Home Video, 2001.
Sayers, Dorothy L. The Mind of the Maker. Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press, 1970.
Shanker, Stuart. Wittgenstein's Remarks on the Foundations of AI. London:
Routledge, 1998.
Shieber, Stuart M. Lessons from a Restricted Turing Test. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
University, Center for Research in Computing Technology, Aiken Computation
Laboratory, 1992.
Sundman, John J. "Artificial Stupidity." Salon.com, February 26, 2003.
Turing, Alan Mathison. 1936. "On Computable Numbers: With an Application to the
Entscheidungsproblem". Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society. 42: 3-4.
Turing, Alan Mathison. 1950. "Computing Machinery and Intelligence". Mind : a
Quarterly Review of Psychology and Philosophy. LIX, no. 236: 433.
"whimsy, n", OED Online. Oxford, UK, 2010.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Grammar: Part I, The Proposition, and Its Sense,
Part II, On Logic and Mathematics. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1974.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, Philosophical investigations: the German text, with a Revised
English Translation (Cambridge, Mass: 2001), 359-360.

Chatbots in Theory and Practice | 41
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, R. G. Bosanquet, and Cora Diamond. Wittgenstein's Lectures
on the Foundations of Mathematics, Cambridge, 1939: From the Notes of R.G.
Bosanquet, Norman Malcolm, Rush Rhees, and Yorick Smythies. Ithaca, N.Y.:
Cornell University Press, 1976.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 42

Chapter 2
The Premise of Machine Literature

The idea of "machine literature" implies first, the existence of texts generated by
the means of a device—mechanical, electrical, or otherwise, and second, the existence of
texts meant for machine consumption. The two possibilities are related. In the most
extreme sense of the proposition, we could imagine a literature written by machines and
for machines—a community of authors, readers, and literary critics that does not involve
human intervention. What would such a literature look like? Would it make sense to us?
And how would it affect the constellation of fundamental literary constructs: text, author,
reader, and interpretation? There is no need to enter the realm of science fiction to begin
answering such questions. It is enough for now first to pose a set of problems related to
the a priori possibility of machine literature in general, and second to begin examining
several specific machine-generated texts. I therefore begin this chapter by exploring the
conceptual problematic implicit in the premise of machine literature. As an applied
corollary to that exploration, I propose to take the first several steps towards creating an
archive of machine-generated texts, and finally to read—or at least to explore the notion
of reading—several documents from that collection.
The incongruity between theory and the archive points to the deep and perhaps
disturbing tension in our understanding of literature as an artifact of the human will. At
the periphery of our literary practice, we intuit a range of blind, formulaic, and even selfregulating forces of discourse. That is to say that much of language, even in its highly

The Premise of Machine Literature | 43
aestheticized forms, reveals itself to us idiomatically, within a shared medium, and
outside of our immediate control. But we also believe that true art—whatever that may
mean—can rise above formula. We often simply insist on our ability to alter creatively
the inherited linguistic norm. In this insistence, the human literary arts proclaim their
independence from the powers of determinism. But the kernel of distinctly human
thought, innovation, and intent—that speck of the individual transcendent spirit which
stands in opposition to the determinate forces of the natural and the social worlds—
remains ephemeral and elusive despite the long tradition of scholarship on the topic.
Literary autopoiesis—the possibility of a self-generating text, or a system of such texts—
challenges the comfort with which we maintain any notion of creative autonomy. I do not
attempt to resolve that tension in this chapter. Instead, it is my aim to invert the accepted
approach to the problem. Rather than stripping literature of its machine-like, algorithmic,
and socially-determined components to reveal the individual human element, I propose to
bear witness to the birth of the literary (and therefore human-like) property of autopoietic
texts—if it is a birth, if the texts can indeed be called literary, and if they are truly selfgenerating.

Conceptual Problems
Can literature produce or perpetuate itself? The question is at the center of our
inquiry. But to begin answering it we must make a short detour into the somewhat arid
land of systems theory. The idea of autopoiesis was popularized by the biologists
Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela in the early 1970s. It means literally "self-

The Premise of Machine Literature | 44
creation" or "self-production." Maturana and Varela used the term to describe an essential
property of a living system. The autopoietic, and therefore living, organism is defined as
"a unity of components which (i) participate recursively in the same network of
productions of components which produced these components, and (ii) realize the
network of productions as a unity in the space in which the components exist." 1 The
paradigmatic example of such a system is a biological cell, whose components exhibit
spatial integrity, and which maintains the production of its internal components to
perpetuate its existence. All this to say that an autopoietic system produces and maintains
its own constituent parts, in contrast to an allopoietic system—take a wrist watch for
example—which relies on other systems for its maintenance (in this case, human labor).
Subsequent to its introduction, the concept of autopoiesis has found wide-spread use in
general systems theory and in the study of large-scale social systems: science, business,
law, and literature. Thus, for example, in his influential 1985 monograph on the
sociological theory of law, Niklas Luhmann envisions the legal system as an autopoietic,
self-organizing entity operating within a distinct sphere of influence. Others, like the
literary theorist Joseph Tabbi, have applied the concept of autopoiesis to literature, which
as a system also seems to be self-reflexive, self-organizing, and self-perpetuating. 2

1

Maturana 1974, 188

2

Tabbi 2002

The Premise of Machine Literature | 45
Critics have pointed out that such an extension of the original concept is
metaphorical at best, and at worst can lead to a kind of an "epistemological solipsism." 3
The first problem is that autopoiesis was originally meant to describe living organisms, as
opposed to non-living ones. In so far as they are living organisms, social systems like law
or literature patently occupy a different order of existence than biological ones like cells
or primates. It is therefore not very clear as to what we may mean when we call the legal
or the literary systems "self-organizing," since it is precisely the living "self" in "selforganization" that we are trying to establish. And it does not help that in colloquial
speech, we often do ascribe other volitional or intentional properties to whole systems, as
is the case when we say something like "the people have spoken" or "corporation XYZ
made a decision to stop selling its products." In all of these examples, the unified and
self-perpetuating quality of the given system seems either imprecise or metaphorical.
Thus, "the people have spoken" may actually mean "there was a national vote," and
"corporation XYZ made a decision" may simply mean that its board members met and
have decided on something among themselves. In this anthropomorphizing imprecision,
the distinction between the living and the non-living systems itself gets lost.
The second problem stems from the first. In identifying the body politic or a
corporation as a type of volitional or intentional entity, we in effect already have drawn
an artificial boundary around its constituent members. By contrast, a cell presents a
clearly demarcated membrane that separates its internal functions from the external. One
3

In this paragraph I amalgamate my own sense of the problematic with the body of critical
literature on the topic, including Swenson 1992 and Biggiero 2001.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 46
may object that even a cell is not a truly unified or self-reliant system, requiring external
resources for its operation. This problem intensifies when we apply the concept of
autopoiesis to social systems, which are not particularly well-insulated entities—as is the
case with governments, corporations, and literature. Such systems lack "natural"
membranes that clearly demarcate their insides from their outsides. Moreover, both cells
and social systems are fundamentally bound by laws of nature and firmly enmeshed in
the context of their habitation. Thus to see their operation as "self-generating" is to
engage in a kind of a solipsistic epistemology, by which we imagine a particular system
as a hermeneutically sealed unit, separate from its environment, and able to produce its
own circumstances, or as the extreme version of the proposition would have it, its own
reality. 4 The idea of literature as an autopoietic system must be subject to these very
same caveats. Before even considering the possibility of literature as an autopoietic
entity, we must understand that social systems are by definition artificially constructed
entities, that they lack clear boundaries, and that their function cannot be strictly equated,
even on the systems level, to the operation of biological organisms.
We can now conclude the detour into system theory and return to our initial
question, but in a much more limited, albeit more productive form: can a text replenish
itself? Can it bloom? Can it reproduce? We are beginning to "zoom in" from viewing
literature as a system to considering the autopoietic potential of a single text. But the
question still seems somewhat odd to me, having again the flavor of an anthropomorphic

4

Kenny & Gardner 1988, also cited in Swenson 1992, 209.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 47
(or at least biomorphic) metaphor. Can this inanimate object—a text—enact or want to
enact anything on its own? Or are we simply making yet another metaphor that attributes
volitional characteristics to an inanimate object? To put it another way: do we imagine a
text as a type of a tool, or is it something more—something capable of containing
objectives beyond the authorial intent? A tool—take a needle for example—is quite
passive in this regard. I can poke my neighbor with a needle, and he could say that it was
the needle that poked him. But clearly it was I who actively meant to do the poking, and
not the needle. The action may have unintended consequences of course: I poked
maliciously, but as a result, the neighbor was rid of his headache. Still, we must say that
the needle in this case was simply an instrument of my volition. Left to its own devices,
the needle "does" nothing. It has no creative or generative potential, we might say. What
would it take for us to begin considering the creative or generative potential of an
inanimate object? To put it another way: is a text something like a needle, or is it
something more than simply a tool or a thing?
Another tradition of asking this kind of questions is distilled in John Searle's
seminal "Chinese Room" thought experiment, which first appeared as an article on the
pages of Behavioral and Brain Sciences in 1980. 5 Searle's concern in this thought
experiment was with artificial intelligence, but in a fashion typical to the discussion (see
the previous chapter on Alan Turing and Ludwig Wittgenstein), the readers were asked to
test their intuitions against a distinctly discursive apparatus. Imagine being locked in a

5 "Minds, Brains and Programs", Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3 (1980): 417–457.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 48
room with "several baskets full of Chinese symbols," writes Searle. You do not
understand a word of Chinese but you are given something like a rulebook, or a giant
look-up table (in your language), which you can use to reference the appropriate response
to anything that may be asked of you in Chinese:
The rules specify the manipulations of the symbols purely formally, in
terms of their syntax, not their semantics [...] Suppose that unknown to
you the symbols passed into the room are called "questions" by the people
outside the room, and the symbols you pass back out of the room are
called "answers." Suppose furthermore, that the programmers are so good
at designing the programs, and that you are so good at manipulating the
symbols, that very soon your answers are indistinguishable from those of a
native Chinese speaker. 6
And so you sit there, in what is essentially a black box, blindly sorting incomprehensible
(to you) symbols, passing and receiving some sort of cards through a slot in the wall (or a
similar contraption). To the person outside of this box, it looks as if the room can speak
Chinese. But, you of course know that you do not speak the language. Your function
within this system is purely mechanical—the point of the experiment being to show that
the formal manipulation of symbols does not rise to anything that we may reasonably
recognize as speaking or understanding a particular language. Knowing Chinese,
according to Searle, requires the appropriate intentional mental state. Moreover, for
Searle such mental states are purely biological phenomena, and a property of very
particular wetware, just as are "growth, reproduction, the secretion of bile, and
6

32

The Premise of Machine Literature | 49
digestion." 7 Thus, the question of attributing intentional states to essentially algorithmic
systems for him hinges on an a priori distinction between living and non-living
organisms.
We arrive then at the same stumbling block that we hit in our discussion of
autopoiesis. In an attempt to define an essential property of a living (thinking, selfreflexive, talking) system, we are confronted with the erasure of the very boundaries that
we were trying to establish. Searle, along with the critics of autopoiesis applied to social
systems, beg the question by simply insisting on the distinction between wetware and
hardware, arguing that properties such as thought, language fluency, and recursive selfregeneration, are exclusive properties human, or at least, biological systems. The
distinction between wetware and hardware may well be worth preserving, even when we
cannot quite come to an agreement on its formal definition. I am intentionally not taking
a clearly defined side in this recurring debate in order to avoid the argument about
definitions. Yet the question of machine literature comes into close contact with these
conversations—the practice of talking with machines evolving out of precisely such
thought experiments as Searle's Chinese room.
In rehashing the premise of Searle's Chinese room, we therefore have a slightly
different vantage point from those interested in the difference between functionalist
(behavior oriented) and structuralist (intent-oriented) explanations of cognitive
phenomena. Note, for example, that the Chinese room is not strictly a mechanical

7

Searle 41

The Premise of Machine Literature | 50
contraption. It contains inanimate elements proper (the room itself), an algorithm for
deciphering the sinographs (presumably produced by other human programmers), and
finally, you—the human who does the looking-up and the sorting of the characters. The
Chinese room is clearly not a simple inanimate object then. It is an amalgam of species.
The wonderfully strange (and I am guessing, unintended) byproduct of Searle's thought
experiment is the inversion of the mechanistic model of the mind—since it is not that he
asks us to imagine a machine inside the human brain, but a whole human being inside the
machine. And so we might follow Searle's intuition to say that the Chinese room does not
really speak Chinese. Or, we might take the functionalist approach to the problem, and
maintain that we don't really care about the innards of the black box: it seems to speak
Chinese, and so it does. I do, however, want to point our attention toward the algorithm at
work inside the contraption—the very chart by which the human is able to blindly sort
the appropriate responses in a language that she does not speak. Were we to try and
locate the seat of intelligence in the overall system, it does seem that we would have to
single out this humble piece of paper—for it is the only inalienable part of the overall
mechanism. We could take away the room, replace the human with a computer, and still
have essentially the same experiment. If anything generates language proficiency in the
Chinese room, it is this algorithm—which means that the emphasis on the computer in
the conversation on artificial intelligence is slightly misplaced. Just like the Chinese
room, the computer is a disposable black box. Were we to atomize the metaphor of
"artificial intelligence," it would be the algorithm that would contain the "artificial" and
the "intelligence" portions of the mechanism.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 51
What is an algorithm? The word itself comes from the Arabic Al-Ḵuwārizmī,
which according to the Oxford English Dictionary means "the native of Ḵwārazm (Ḵiva),
surname of the Persian mathematician Abu Ja'far Mohammed Ben Musa, who flourished
early in the 9th cent., and through the translation of whose work on Algebra, the Arabic
numerals became generally known in Europe." The original meaning of the word simply
denoted "the Arabic, or decimal system of numeration." 8 But in the contemporary sense
it means something like "a process, or a set of rules," or perhaps a "step-by-step
procedure" for reaching a decision or a clinical diagnosis in the case of medicine. 9 As
such, the algorithm looks to be a type of what J.L. Austin dubbed as a "performative
utterance." In contrast to descriptive statements ("The emperor isn't wearing anything at
all!"), a performative utterance has the qualities of a) being unfalsifiable and b)
constituting an action or a part of the action. 10 Austin's paradigmatic illustration for these
two properties are the wedding vows. Saying "I do" does not describe the action in a way
where the description could be considered true or false. The vows are a kind of action.
They bring something forth in a way a needle prick can bring forth the reaction of pain.
The algorithm looks to be a special kind of a performative utterance, which differs
from other types in that it does not elicit the action immediately. The algorithm is a time
capsule of sorts—it will perform when it is called to action (where the wedding vows are

8

Oxford English Dictionary Online

9

Ibid.

10

Austin 5.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 52
valid as soon as they are uttered). This seems like a minor difference at first—the ability
to shift something I will now, into action later. Imagine for example, a contraption that
will cook an egg for me at some specified time in the future. It is as if a splinter of my
volitional desire (to cook an egg) has been broken off to perform an action by itself
(cooking the egg), independently and yet on my behalf. In this way the algorithm,
although being a dead, inanimate thing (made out of symbols), seems to possess a spark
of animate force capable of acting in the world. The algorithm is a special kind of
performative utterance which, like an enchanted object, continues to do the master's
bidding even in the absence of the master. We could call these kinds of utterances
"imperative."
The imperative is a type of a performative utterance in that it enacts rather than
describes things in the world. Unlike other performatives, the imperative utterance is
often meant to enact something at a later time and place, without the immediate presence
of the original author. The paradigmatic example of an imperative utterance would be the
legal concept of a will, by which "a person's formal declaration of his intention as to the
disposal of his property or other matters to be performed after his death, most usually
made in writing." 11 The legal definition contains something common to all such
imperatives, namely that they must usually be recorded somehow—on paper, on audio
tape, video, or by similar means. All this to say that an imperative utterance is often a
document of some sort. Looking back into Searle's thought experiment, we see that the

11

OED

The Premise of Machine Literature | 53
Chinese room does contain a document of that kind. Something does speak Chinese in
the room—the look-up chart which contains the heuristic that we were asked to follow
blindly. At the very least we would have to agree that the person composing the chart
does speak Chinese, and that his language ability was transposed in time and place by the
means of that document. But is that ability transferred to the mechanism of the black box,
or does it remain squarely in the mind of the original Chinese speaker? This and similar
problems contained in the premise of procedurally-derived literature cannot be resolved
by the purely theoretical thought exercise. We must look to the archive for the traces of
machine composition and consider the practice of interacting with algorithmicallycomposed texts.

A Brief Pre-History of Algorithmic Imagination
The documents of the imperative utterance are all around us, but for some reason,
we overlook their poetry, even though such texts compel us to action, containing a kernel
of transmitted creative potential. This is perhaps because such materials often appear to
us so pedestrian: the toaster manual, instructions for assembling furniture, the to-do list, a
doctor's prescription. Yet there are documents that belong to the same category which
also shape our lives in profound and significant ways—documents like living wills, stage
directions, software programs, and codes of conduct. In that light, all textual materials
seem to be imperative, if only in the part that transmits the intent of one individual into
the mind or the actions of another. But in the context of our discussion, we are interested

The Premise of Machine Literature | 54
in a particular type of an imperative utterance, one which contains specifically discursive
potential—a textual algorithm capable of generating further texts.
At this time, I would like to imagine a condensed history of such materials,
pausing only to illuminate several dark periods in its development. The history begins
with the work of Ramon Llull, who in the thirteenth century developed a method for
generating rhetorical truths by the manipulation of geometrical figures. Llull believed that
our knowledge about any given topic could be reduced to a set of primary concepts,
which then in turn could be arranged in various combinations to produce all possible
statements about a given topic. 12 Llull's diagrams were revived in the seventeenth
century in the works of the German Baroque scholars Athanasius Kircher, Quirinus
Kuhlmann, Georg Philipp Harsdörffer, and Gottfried Leibniz. A strain of Llullism
concerned with the development of a universal language and the calculus of thought
passed from Leibniz, to Gottlob Frege, to Bertrand Russell, and finally into the
foundations of modern computer science—a development in the intellectual history of
mathematics, which I provide here only as a sketch, and which falls outside of our
purview.
A parallel and far less-examined strain in the history of the algorithm developed
in the applied aesthetic realm. The first "golden age" of the algorithm aesthetic has to be
the German Baroque period, in which the principles of Llull's combinatorial composition
were applied to literature and music alike. Notable among these experiments is the
12

Llull, Ramón, and Anthony Bonner. Selected Works of Ramón Llull (1232-1316). Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1985.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 55
proteus verse of Quirinus Kuhlmann and Georg Philipp Harsdörffer. Proteus verse,
according to Leibniz, is "a couplet or a longer poem, which is constructed in such a way
that the order of words can be changed without destroying its meter or rhyme." 13 A
typical example of proteus verse is Harsdörffer's:
Ehr/ Kunst/ Geld/ Guth/ Lob/ Weib und Kind
Man hat/ sucht/ fehlt/ hofft/ und verschwind.

Honor, art, money, wealth, praise, wife and children;
having, searching, failing, hoping, disappearing. 14

The idea is to extend the poetic process by allowing the reader to create further
textual permutations based on the selected material. Athanasius Kircher had similar goals
in mind in designing the Arca Musarithmica—a box-like device that amounts to a threedimensional look-up table, by which a composer not versed in music would combine
predetermined musical phrases (written on wooden planks) to produce a complete piece
of music. The applied potential of these devices almost immediately raised the question
of creative agency. The correspondence between Kircher and Quirinus Kuhlmann
practically foreshadows Searle's Chinese Room experiment when, in response to
Kircher's description of Arca Musarithmica, Kuhlmann maintains that the use of a

13

Quoted in Westerhoff 456 from Leibniz, Dissertatio, 86.

14

Quoted in Westerhoff 457 from Leibniz, Dissertatio 88 and Harsdorffer Delitiae, III,5 9-60.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 56
similarly structured "poetry box" in educating children would amount to "mere
versification, and not poetry" (sed versûs, non poëma.) Kuhlmann writes:
Sed lusus est ingeniosus, Ingeniose

But [the poetry box] is just an ingenious

Kirchere, non methodus, prima fronte

game, Ingenious Kircher, not a method,

aliquid promittens, in recessu nihil

promising something on the surface, but

solvens. Sine cista enim puer nihil

solving nothing deep down. For without the

potest respondere, & in cista nihil

box the boy can answer nothing, and with

praeter verba intelligit; tot profert,

the box he understands nothing but words.

quot audit, sine intellectu...

He produces whatever he hears, without
understanding, like a parrot. 15

The aesthetics of Baroque combination poetry were picked up again in the 1960s,
by the authors loosely associated with the OULIPO (OUvroir de LIttérature POtentielle).
Raymond Queneau's "Hundred Thousand Billion Poems" (Cent Mille Milliards de
Poèmes) is perhaps the most often-cited example of a combination poem. The poem is a
sonnet, fourteen lines in length, but where each line can be substituted by nine variations
that do not alter the rhyme or the meter of the composition. In effect, Queneau wrote ten
different sonnets, which allow for the transposition of the individual lines, resulting in
1014 possible permutations. 16 Thus, the combination number 7.10.7.8 – 4.3.10.8 – 7.3.5 –
6.8.10 yields the following sonnet:

15

Quoted in Gillespie 32, original in Kuhlmann's Epistolae Duoae Amsterdam 1674, 4.

16

Queneau published his poem on thin strips of paper, which allowed the reader to "mix and
match" the lines.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 57
Quand l'un avecque l'autre aussitôt sympathise

When each of you with all his heart agrees

lorsque le marbrier astique nos tombeaux

the undertakers peer and say Oho

la découverte alors voilà qui traumatise

it's finding out that's likely to displease

il donne à la tribu des cris aux sens nouveaux

which freshens up the tribal rumbelow

On était bien surpris par cette plaine grise

So plain a plain's not what one often sees

où venaient par milliers s'échouer les harenceaux

where shoals of herring boats now lie below

de la mort on vous greffe une orde bâtardise

for death casts piles of shit on pedigrees

à tous n'est pas donné d'aimer les chocs verbaux

most people like to read the words they know

Le généalogiste observe leur bouillotte

The genealogist finds every blot

on sale le requin on fume à l'échalotte

the shark is smoked on beds of bergamot

l'autocar écrabouille un peu d'esprit latin

you can't quote Virgil in a limousine

On regrette à la fin les agrestes bicoques

You'll come to miss the peasant in his smock

tu me stupéfies plus que tous les ventriloques

I nominate you as a gapingstock

toute chose pourtant doit avoir une fin

clear from the start the ending is foreseen 17

Despite the critical attention given to the OULIPO experiments, I would argue here that a
far more significant "silver age" of algorithmic composition began to take shape at the
turn of the twentieth century, well before the advent of electronic computing. Allow me
to make a few additional broad stokes here. Traditionally, we associate the word

17

I chose the Beverley Charles Rowe's translation which takes quite a few liberties with the
French in order to preserve the rhyme. It is available as at
http://www.bevrowe.info/Queneau/QueneauRandom_v4.html. Last accessed on 10/11/2010.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 58
"formalism" with the work of the early-century Russian literary critics and scholars Boris
Eichenbaum, Viktor Shklovsky, Yury Tynyanov, Roman Jakobson, and Vladimir Propp;
the related work of the Prague Linguistic Circle in the 1920-30s; and the mostly AngloAmerican New Critics of the mid-century like John Crowe Ransom, William K. Wimsatt,
Monroe Beardsley, T.S. Eliot, and many others. But these developments were by-andlarge critical developments—affecting more the reception than the practice of literary
production. In this way, Propp's influential Morphology of the Folktale (1928) attempted
to create a typology of recurring literary "functions" at work in Russian folk-tales. The
typology contained thirty-one "morphemes" such as complicity, villainy, mediation,
departure, victory, pursuit, return, rescue, and so on. But the work intended to analyze the
genre, rather than to provide a formula for constructing folk tales. At least we can say that
there were no known Russian writers who attempted to write folk-tales using Propp's
morphology. Were there?
Here is where I begin to get a little suspicious about the accepted history of ideas
when it comes to formalism as a movement in literary criticism. In 1894, Georges Polti—
a relatively minor French author—published Les Trente-Six Situations Dramatiques
(translated into English in 1916 by William R. Kane as "Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations,"
published by the Editor Company). Judging by the number of imitations, the work was an
almost immediate international success and remains in print today, in 2010. Unlike
Propp, Polti is very explicit about his influences. The work begins with a quote from J.W.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 59
Goethe, who writes that "Gozzi 18 maintained that there can be but thirty-six tragic
situations. Schiller took great pains to find more, but he was unable to find even so many
as Gozzi." 19 Polti writes that "in France, Gerard de Nerval 20 alone had grasped and
presented briefly the ensemble of all dramatic production, in an article upon Soumet's
'Jane Grey,' in L' Artiste," 21 but that "since Nerval, no one has treated, in Gozzi's
genuinely technical manner, of the secrets of invention." 22 To derive his thirty-six
situations Polti assembles "the principal dramas of China, of India, of Judea, and,
needless to say, of the Greek theater," along with "the Spanish authors, the French
classics, the Italians, the Germans of the Romantic revival, and our modern dramatic
literature," and finally "two hundred of the examples […] from other literary genres akin
to the dramatic: romance, epic, history, and from reality [!]" 23 The stated purpose of
Polti's project is to ask "Which are the dramatic situations neglected by our own epoch?
[…] Which, on the other hand, are most in use today? Which are the most neglected, and
which the most used, in each epoch, genre, school, author? What are the reasons for these

18

The Italian dramatist Carlo Gozzi (1720-1806).

19

Polti, 9.

20

The French poet Gerard de Nerval (1808-1855).

21

Polti 10.

22

Polti 11.

23

Polti 13-14. This last is a surprising component in Polti database. "For this investigation can
and should be pursued in human nature, by which I mean in politics, in courts of justice, in
daily life" (13).

The Premise of Machine Literature | 60
preferences?" 24 These questions lead Polti to his thirty-six situations: supplication,
deliverance, crime, pursuit, disaster, revolt, abduction, enigma, madness, ambition, and
so on. Many of these correspond to Propp's thirty-one morphemes, although to his credit,
Propp's improves on Polti's scheme by arranging the situations in chronological (from the
point of view of the plot) sequence.
Despite the lofty historical and philosophical ambitions, Polti's work skews
decidedly towards the craft of writing plots. The reader never does find out why certain
"situations" are more prevalent in one epoch or the other. Rather the book's conclusion
contains the following remarkable appeal to the reader:
Thus, from the first edition of this little book, I might offer (speaking not
ironically but seriously) to dramatic authors and theatrical managers, ten
thousand scenarios, totally different from those used repeatedly upon our
stage in the last fifty years. The scenarios will be, needless to say, of a
realistic and effective character. I will contract to deliver a thousand in
eight days. For the production of a single gross, but twenty-four hours are
required. Prices quoted on single dozens. Write or call, No. 19, Passage de
l'Elysee des Beaux-Arts. The Situations will be detailed act by act, and, if
desired, scene by scene. 25

24

Polti 14.

25

Polti 134

The Premise of Machine Literature | 61
Besides Polti's largely unacknowledged influence on the development of Russian
Formalism,26 the principle impact of his work was and remains in the field of applied
composition studies. Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations inspired countless imitations in the
"writer's aid" genre, among these the most popular examples being William Wallace
Cook's Plotto (1928), and Wycliffe A. Hill's Plot Genie (1931), 27 among many others.
Plot Genie in particular shows the genre's direct lineage to Ramon Llull's combinatorial
diagrams. The booklet came with a cardboard wheel, by which the author could select a
random combination of characters and plot devices. 28
The proliferation and the popularity of combinatorial writer aids in the early
twentieth century have to be attributed, at least in part, to the burgeoning American pulp
fiction market. James D. Wood—a scholar and a contributor to The Pulp Companion
online fan community—describes it in the following terms:
The year is 1935. On every street corner, newsstands are brimming with
pulp magazines. Readers young and old thrill to the battles of G-8 and
Operator 5, to the adventures of the Spider, the Shadow and Doc Savage
[…] You are a pulp fiction writer. Seated behind your Remington
typewriter, your fingers dance and the pages fly: trench-coated private
eyes and sultry gun molls, hard riding sheriffs and gun-slinging
desperadoes, fearless spacemen and bug-eyed monsters—for a penny a

26 As far as I know, Propp's debt to Polti is completely unexamined. See Erlich 1955, Jameson
1972, Steiner 1984, and Wellek 1955.
27 I am indebted to Edward J. Wood from The Pulp Companion for most of the references in this
list. http://thepulp.net/PulpCompanion/03summer/plot.html last accessed on 10/11/2010.
28 Described in Gardner 19 and on The Pulp Companion, see above.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 62
word, you can do it all […] It’s Friday night. After a long day at the
keyboard, should you have a bite of supper or just go to bed? The phone
rings. It’s the editor of Strange Science Magazine, and as usual, he sounds
like he’s double-parked. "I need a 50,000 word space opera,” he barks.
"On my desk, first thing Monday morning!" As a pulp fiction writer, you
are a professional. You have no time to sit and wait to be inspired—you
must produce on demand. As much as you need your dictionary and
thesaurus, you need your story plotter. 29
The turn of the twentieth century—modernism—is commonly characterized as the
dawning of mass production: interchangeable parts, machine tools, and electrical power.
We are accustomed to thinking that the paradigmatic aesthetic concern of the moderns
was mass production, or rather the mass mechanical re-production of the work of art.
Mechanical reproduction certainly contributed to the sharp decline in book prices in the
first decades of the twentieth century, but the means of producing texts underwent a
radical change too, unrelated to the mechanisms of the printing press. In the twentieth
century we began to produce and consume algorithmically-constructed texts on a large
scale.
Polti's Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations, Cook's Plotto, and Hills' Plot Genie were
met with excoriating critical reception. "The subject and the scorn almost placed the
subject of situation in the category of untouchables," Carl Dahlström writes in the 1936
issue of PMLA. In the concluding sentences of his book, Cook reports a conversation
with a London publisher who believes that "Plotto will be condemned publicly—and
29

http://thepulp.net/PulpCompanion/03summer/plot.html, last accessed on 10/13/2010.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 63
probably used privately." 30 The critical exile continues to this day: JSTOR 31 contains
exactly one article devoted to Polti's work, a single mention of Plotto in a Frenchlanguage article on mass literature, and nothing on Plot Genie. 32 By what logic does the
relatively obscure Vladimir Propp become canonized in the graduate literary studies
curriculum, 33 and the massively popular Georges Polti relegated to almost complete
obscurity? I want to make sure that my intentions in asking this are not misunderstood. I
have no interest in promoting Polti's work, or detracting from Propp's contribution to the
field. I merely want to point to the intuitive sense of collective discomfort with the notion
of algorithmic composition. The idea just seems somehow to lessen the weight given to
human agency in the act of literary creation—even to the point of preventing
conversation on the topic. Polti himself understood this problem very clearly: "But I hear
myself accused, with much violence, of an intent to 'kill imagination.' 'Enemy of fancy!'
'Destroyer of wonders!' 'Assassin of prodigy!" he writes at the end of Thirty-Six Dramatic
Situations. "These and similar titles cause me not a blush," he concludes. 34

30

Cook Chapter 7.

31

"A not–for–profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build
upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive of over one thousand academic
journals and other scholarly content" (from the About page on Jstor.com, accessed on
10/13/2010).

32

As I noted before, Plot Genie is mentioned in Martin Gardner's Logic Machines and Diagrams
(1958).

33

Five mentions in The Norton Anthology of Criticism alone.

34

Polti 134

The Premise of Machine Literature | 64
The enemy, in this case, is what Polti calls "the ultra-romantic" notion of the
imagination—"the charlatanesque 'faculty,' analysis of which is, it would seem, eternally
interdicted." 35 Polti writes:
One vigorous blow was, for the moment, given to this legend of the
Imagination by Positivism, which asserted that this so-called creative
faculty was merely the kaleidoscope of our memories, stirred by chance.
But it did not sufficiently insist upon the inevitably banal and monotonous
results of these chance stirrings, some of our memories-precisely those
least interesting and least personal-repeating themselves a thousand times
in our minds, returning mercilessly in all manner of method-less
combinations. 36
The alternative to the method-less meandering of romantic imagination is guided
experimentation. Here Polti envisions the extension of his inquiry, a "New Art" that
thrives on the numerous, yet unexplored combinations of dramatic possibility. 37 Pulp
fiction was perhaps that new art, but Polti and his followers could not have anticipated
the radical potential of procedural composition enabled by the developments in computer
science and information technology.

35

Polti 135

36

Polti 135

37

Would that I might be able to place the first, the obscurest foundation-stone of its gigantic
citadel! There, drawing about her the souls of the poets, the Muse shall rise before this
audience re-assembled from ancient temples, before these peoples who gathered of yore
around Herodotus and Pindar; she will speak the new language-the Dramatic-a language too
lofty for the comprehension of the single soul, however great it be,-a language not of words
but of thrills, such as that spoken to armies,-a language in truth addressed to thee, 0 Bacchus,
dispenser of glory, soul of crowds, delirium of races, abstract, but One and Eternal! (Polti 142)

The Premise of Machine Literature | 65
Espen Aarseth wrote that computer literature should more precisely be regarded
as cyborg literature, since the product of machine imagination is properly a combination
of efforts between human and automated elements. 38 But in that sense, we may view all
literary production as an amalgam of individual, social, and inorganic compounds. That is
to repeat the argument implicit in the previous two sections of this chapter: the problem
of machine literature does not hinge on the development of artificial intelligence. The
composition of a sonnet, for example, is already a hybrid process, in that it combines the
efforts of individual human and shared algorithmic imagination. And as history bears it
out, procedural content generation has been a part of our literary life several centuries
prior to the invention of the electronic computer. The emerging practice of digital
humanities is remarkable not for the increasing life-like similarity between man and
machine, but for our willingness to develop ever-more sophisticated algorithms by which
the very idea of imagination is extended to non-human entities.
The reading of procedurally-generated texts cannot and should not therefore
proceed by the analysis of generated content. This would be as fruitless as arguing about
the language capabilities of a room that speaks Chinese. It is also not terribly important to
understand the technical capabilities of the hardware executing the code, as Peter Swirski

38

"Given a machine for producing text, there can be three main positions of human-machine
collaboration: (1) pre-processing, in which the machine is programmed, configured, and
loaded by the human; (2) co-processing, in which the machine and the human produce text in
tandem; and (3) post-processing, in which the human selects some of the machine's effusions
and excludes others" (Aarseth 135).

The Premise of Machine Literature | 66
suggests in his "Computhors and Biterature." 39 After all, the ideal computer is a universal
machine—capable of following any set of instructions. 40 The real "action" lies in the
algorithm which mediates between the human, the machine, and the textual components
of literary production. Consider the following verses from The Policeman's Beard Is Half
Constructed—a book of poetry which was billed as "the first book ever written by a
computer:" 41
I gave the man a coat. I gave the woman a brassiere.
I gave myself an electric current. We all were
happy and full of delight. Take the coat from the
man and remove the brassiere from the woman and take
the electric current from me and we will be sad
and full of anguish.

Happily and sloppily a skipping jackal watches an aloof crow.
This is enthralling. Will the jackal eat the crow? I
fantasize about the jackal and the crow, about the crow in the
expectations of the jackal. You may ponder about this too!

More than iron, more than lead, more than gold I need electricity.
I need it more than I need lamb or pork or lettuce or cucumber.

39

Swirski 85.

40

See the chapter on Turing and Wittgestein.

41

From the book cover.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 67
I need it for my dreams. 42
These lines entertain because in them we imagine a budding intellect, like a child's—an
intellect that reaches for the familiar form only to fail in subtle and endearing ways, and
in failure to reveal the promise of a future genius. "The book has been proofread for
spelling but otherwise is completely unedited," writes Racter's programmer, Bill
Chamberlain, in the preface to the volume. A close analysis of code used to generate
these verses reveals the extent to which the feeling of whimsical precociousness is
carefully contrived by the program's human handlers. 43 Chamberlain fails to mention the
thousands of combinations that did not make it into the slim volume. Essentially, Racter
is nothing more than a Madlibs 44 fill-in-the-blank contraption, drawing on its vocabulary
from a randomized databank. Considering that combination engines have been around
since at least the 13th Century, what significance is the fact that Policeman's Beard was
produced by a computer? Would it make a difference if we arrived at the same texts by
hand, ink, and paper? 45 To read Racter's verse in full, without Chamberlain's
stewardship, would be foolish and likely impossible—just as it would be impossible to
read the 1014 permutations of Queneau's sonnet. In fact, that is not how one would think
to read the "Hundred Thousand Billion Poems." Rather we would experiment with the

42

From Racter, various pages (no page numbers throughout).

43

I am thankful to John Barger for his thoughtful analysis of Inrac compiler code samples.

44

Explain Madlibs for those who don't know.

45

This is of course possible to do by hand.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 68
sonnet until the rules of the permutation become clear, and until we are familiar with the
possibility of further sonnet generation.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 69

Works Cited
Aarseth, Espen J. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature. Baltimore, Md:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.
Austin, J. L. How to Do Things with Words. The William James lectures, 1955.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1962.
Bakhtin, M. M., and Michael Holquist. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays.
Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981.
Barger, John. "The Policeman's Beard" Was Largely Prefab!" Posted posted to the
comp.ai.* hierarchy in June 1993, and reprinted in the August 1993 issue of The
Journal of Computer Game Design. Last accessed through his personal site at
http://www.robotwisdom.com/ai/racterfaq.html on 10/18/2010.
Biggiero.
Cook, William Wallace. Plotto: A New Method of Plot Suggestion for Writers of
Creative Fiction. Battle Creek, Mich: Ellis Pub. Co, 1928.
Dahlström, Carl. "The Analysis of Literary Situation," PMLA Vol. 51, No. 3 (Sep.,
1936), pp. 872-889.
Erlich, Victor, and René Wellek. Russian Formalism: History, Doctrine. 1955.
Findlen, Paula. Athanasius Kircher: The Last Man Who Knew Everything. New York:
Routledge, 2004.
Gardner, Martin. Logic Machines and Diagrams. Brighton: The Harvester Press, 1982.
Gillespie, Gerald. "Primal Utterance: Observations on Kuhlmann's Coorrespondence
with Kircher, in View of Leibniz' Theories." In Wolfgang Fleischhauer. Wege Der
Worte: Festschrift Für Wolfgang Fleischhauer, ed. Riechel, Donald. Köln: Böhlau,
1978.
Hill, Wycliffe Aber. The Plot Genie. Hollywood, Calif: E.E. Gagnon Co, 1931.
Jameson, Fredric. The Prison-House of Language: A Critical Account of Structuralism
and Russian Formalism. Princeton essays in literature. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1972.
Kenny, V. and Gardner, G. "The constructions of self-organizing systems." The Irish
Journal of Psychology, 9, 1, 1988, pp. 1-24.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 70
Kuhlmann, Quirinus. Epistolae Duae. Amsterdam: Lotho de Haes, 1674.
Leibniz. Dissertatio de Arte Combinatoria. In qua Ex Arithmeticae fundamentis
Complicationuma ac Transpositionum Doctrina novis praeceptis exstruitur. Leipzig:
1666.
Lachmann, Renate, and Stefan Rieger. Text und Wissen: technologische und
anthropologische Aspekte. Literatur und Anthropologie, Bd. 16. Tübingen: Narr,
2003.
Luhmann, Niklas, A Sociological Theory of Law (1985)
Lull, Ramón, and Anthony Bonner. Selected Works of Ramón Llull (1232-1316).
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1985.
Llull, Ramon, and Mark D. Johnston. Ramon Llull's New Rhetoric: Text and
Translation of Llull's Rethorica Nova. Davis, Ca: Hermagoras Press, 1994.
Maturana H.R., F.G Varela, and R. Uribe. "Autopoiesis: The Organization of Living
Systems, Its Characterization and a Model."Biosystems 5 (1974): 187-196.
Perec, Georges, Eugen Helmlé, and Georges Perec. Die Maschine: Hörspiel, Text und
CD. Blieskastel: Gollenstein, 2001
Perec, Georges. "The Machine." Review of Contemporary Fiction 29, no. 1
(Spring2009 2009): 33-93. Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost (accessed
December 20, 2010).
Polti, Georges. Les trente-six situations dramatiques. Paris, Édition du "Mercure de
France," 1895.
Polti, Georges, and Lucille Ray. The Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations. Franklin, Ohio:
J.K. Reeve, 1921.
Propp, V., Alan Dundes, and Louis A. Wagner. Morphology of the Folktale. American
Folklore Society bibliographical and special series, 9. Austin: Univ. of Texas Press,
2005.
Racter, William Chamberlain, and Joan Hall. The Policeman's Beard Is Half
Constructed: Computer Prose and Poetry by Racter; [the First Book Ever Written
by a Computer; a Bizarre and Fantastic Journey into the Mind of a Machine]. New
York, NY: Warner Books, 1984.
Rossi, Paolo. Logic and the Art of Memory: The Quest for a Universal Language.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.

The Premise of Machine Literature | 71
Searle, John. "Minds, Brains and Programs", Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3 (1980):
417–457.
Searle, John. Minds, Brains, and Science. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1984.
Simmons, Charles. Plots That Sell to Top-Pay Magazines. New York: W. Funk, 1952.
Steiner, P. Russian Formalism: A Metapoetics. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1984
Swenson 1992.Swirski
Swirski, Peter. "Computhors and Biterature: Machine-Written Fiction?" SubStance
Vol. 22, No. 1, Issue 70 (1993), pp. 81-90.
Tabbi, Joseph. Cognitive Fictions. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2002.
Westerhoff, Jan. "Poeta Calculans: Harsdörffer, Leibniz, and the 'Mathesis
Universalis'"
Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 60, No. 3 (Jul., 1999), pp. 449-467.
Wellek, René. German, Russian, and Eastern European Criticism, 1900-1950. A
History of modern criticism, v.7. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991.
Wood, J. Edward. "Plot Devices." The Pulp Companion online fan community at
http://thepulp.net/PulpCompanion/03summer/plot.html, last accessed on
10/11/2010.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 72

Chapter 3
Intelligent and Unintelligent Design: The Infinite Monkey
Theorem in Science, Pseudo-science, Art Criticism, and
Fiction
Genealogy of a Trope
Imagine the following system: the computer will randomly combine words to
create a series of Shakespearean sonnets. Many of these will be nonsensical, but as the
permutations grow, the sonnets are deposited in some sort of online database, which in
turn will be read and rated by a group of judges (alternatively, the ratings could be open
to all willing participants). With time, the computer will begin to use the ratings to refine
the quality of its output, until, by the method of blind experimentation it produces
something we could regard as poetry—and perhaps profound poetry, poetry that would
do well in any prize competition. In this thought experiment the reader may recognize a
variation of the so-called Infinite Monkey Theorem (IMT)—a fairly stable trope of
combinatory poetics that frequently surfaces in popular culture. My thought experiment
expands on the original premise of monkeys typing sonnets in that it contains a notion of
evolution, by which the learning algorithm is improved over time. The "weaker" strains
of a given literary trope would "die off," while those that make a lasting impression
would "survive" and "multiply" to produce genetically-related literary offspring. We can
now ask: doesn't creativity always work like that—a countless troupe of writers
experimenting blindly, their efforts measured against the forces of social filtration, which
ultimately reject most experiments as detritus unworthy of anyone's attention? In this
chapter, I would like to think about RNGs—random number generators, luck—and their

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 73
influence on the literary life. I would like to do this by examining the trope of monkeys
with typewriters first as a thought experiment in fiction and criticism, and then as texts:
written by actual monkeys with actual typewrites and also by their digital equivalents—
evolutionary text algorithms, spam bots, and spam filters.
The Yale Book of Quotations attributes the first formulation of the Infinite
Monkey Theorem (IMT) to the French mathematician Emile Borel, who in a 1913 paper
on statistics proposed that the random generation of texts by monkeys could fill the
richest libraries of the world "with the exact texts of books of every sort in every
language found in the world's richest libraries." 1 The trope entered literature through a
series of quotations by English-speaking authors, usually scientists, who used it to
explore and to popularize the notions of statistics and probability. Thus in The Anatomy
of Science, published in 1926 Gilbert N. Lewis writes: "Borel makes the amusing
supposition of a million monkeys allowed to play upon the keys of a million typewriters.
What is the chance that this wanton activity should reproduce exactly all of the volumes
which are contained in the library of the British Museum?" 2 The English physicist Arthur
S. Eddington quotes the thought experiment in his 1928 The Nature of the Physical

1

Concevons qu'on ait dressé un million de singes à frapper au hasard sur les touches d'une
machine à écrire et que ... ces singes dactylographes travaillent avec ardeur dix heures par
jour avec un million de machines à écrire de types variés ... Et au bout d'un an, ces volumes se
trouveraient renfermer la copie exacte des livres de toute nature et de toutes langues
conservés dans les plus riches bibliothèques du monde.

Let us imagine that a million monkeys have been trained to strike the keys of a typewriter at
random, and that ... these typist monkeys work eagerly ten hours a day on a million
typewriters of various kinds. ... And at the end of a year, these volumes turn out to contain the
exact texts of the book of every sort and every language found in the world's richest libraries.
(Shapiro 95 quoting Borel's " Mécanique Statistique et Irréversibilité").
2

Newton 158 also quoted in Shapiro 95.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 74
World, as does James Jean in the Mysterious Universe, published in 1930. 3 From popular
books on science the trope moved to science fiction, appearing in Raymond F. Jones's
"Fifty Million Monkeys'' in Astounding Science Fiction on October 1943 and Isaac
Asimov's "The Monkey's Finger'' in Startling Stories on February 1953. 4
Perhaps the most significant if not somewhat oblique reference to the
Infinite Monkey Theorem can be found in "The Total Library"—a short, non-fictional
essay by Jorge Luis Borges that appeared first in 1939 and which prefigures the more
widely-known short story "The Library of Babel," published in 1941. In "The Total
Library" Borges draws a genealogy of his own, tracing the idea of the total library back to
Aristotle's Metaphysics. In the Metaphysics, Aristotle quotes the cosmology of Leucippus
and Democritus who explain the complexity of the world by the combination of simpler
elements: "for they say the real is differentiated only by 'rhythm' and 'inter-contact' and
'turning'; and of these rhythm is shape, inter-contact is order, and turning is position; for
A differs from N in shape, AN from NA in order, M from W in position." 5 But it is
Cicero, who, according to Borges, first transfers the combinatory principle from
cosmology to literary composition:
I do not marvel that there should be anyone who can persuade himself that
certain solid and individual bodies are pulled along by the force of gravity,

3

I am indebted for this genealogy to Jim Reeds of the band Infinite Monkeys. He maintains a list
of relevant citations at
http://www.angelfire.com/in/hypnosonic/Parable_of_the_Monkeys.html and thanks several of
his site's visitors for corrections and contributions. Last accessed on 3/16/2011.

4

Ibid.

5

Aristotle 14.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 75
and that the fortuitous collision of those particles produces this beautiful
world that we see. He who considers this possible will also be able to
believe that if innumerable characters of gold, each representing one of the
twenty-one letters of the alphabet, were thrown together onto the ground,
they might produce the Annals of Ennius. I doubt whether chance could
possibly create even a single verse to read. 6
A perceptive reader may recognize the precursor of the contemporary "intelligent design"
argument in these lines, and as we shall see later, the trope of the total library often
intersects the conversation on biological design and evolution. By the eighteenth century
the trope becomes recognizable enough to be used by Jonathan Swift in an essay
lampooning the "pseudo-philosophical essays of the time." In "A Tritical Essay upon the
Faculties of the Mind" Swift writes:
Philosophers say, that man is a microcosm, or little world, resembling in
miniature every part of the great; and in my opinion, the body natural may
be compared to the body politic; if this be so, how can the Epicurean's
opinion be true, that the universe was formed by a fortuitous concourse of
atoms, which I will no more believe, than that of the accidental jumbling
of the letters of the alphabet, could fall by chance in to a most ingenious
and learned treatise of philosophy. 7
Given the frankly sarcastic tone of the essay, it is hard to tell whether Swift actually has
anything to say about "the accidental jumbling of the letters," of whether he offers it
merely as a commonplace quotation, without attaching much meaning to the particulars.

6

Borges, Selected Non-Fictions 215.

7

Swift 291. The title of Swift's essay is given incorrectly in the English translation of "The Total
Library" as "Trivial Essay on the Faculties of the Soul." I made a note to that effect in the
entry for the Infinite Monkey Theorem on Wikipedia.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 76
"A Tritical Essay" is a meaningless jumble of quotations, however. In that context, the
reader is to understand that quoting at random does not a learned discourse make.
At the risk of falling into that trap myself, I will further mention only the farewell
scene from Lewis Carroll's Sylvie and Bruno Concluded, where the young Arthur
discusses the eventuality of complete creative exhaustion. "The day must come—if the
world lasts long enough—when every possible tune will have been composed, every
possible punt perpetrated, and worse than that, every possible book written!" he says to
Lady Muriel, who upon hearing such a preposterous suggestion wrings her hands "like a
tragedy-queen." 8 Borges concludes his genealogy with "The Universal Library," a
mathematical essay by Kurd Lasswitz, the German scientist, philosopher, and a writer of
proto-science fiction.
The echoes of this genealogy are surely found in at least two of Borges's short
stories: the 1939 "Pierre Menard, The Author of Don Quixote" and the 1941 "The Library
of Babel." In "Pierre Menard," Borges imagines an author who dedicates his life to
writing Don Quixote—not another copy or a "mechanical transcription" of the iconic text,

8

When things around me seemed once more to be real, Arthur was saying "I'm afraid there’s no
help for it: they must be finite in number."
"I should be sorry to have to believe it," said Lady Muriel. "Yet, when one comes to think of
it, there are no new melodies, now-a-days. What people talk of as 'the last new song' always
recalls to me some tune I’ve known as a child!"
"The day must come—if the world lasts long enough—" said Arthur, "when every possible
tune will have been composed every possible pun perpetrated—" (Lady Muriel wrung her
hands, like a tragedy-queen) “and worse than that, every possible book written! For the
number of words is finite."
"It’ll make very little difference to the authors,” I suggested. "Instead of saying 'what book
shall I write?' an author will ask himself 'which book shall I write?' A mere verbal distinction!"
(Carroll 536)

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 77
but the Quixote, "a word-for-word and line-for-line" doppelganger of the original. This
possibility itself was already suggested by Arthur, in Carroll's Sylvie and Bruno
Concluded. The number of words is finite, says Arthur, but it will make no difference to
the authors: "Instead of saying 'what book shall I write?' an author will ask himself 'which
book shall I write?'" 9
In "The Library of Babel" Borges expands on this thought experiment to imagine
to total library "perfect, complete, and whole," the bookshelves of which contain:
all possible combinations of the twenty-two orthographic symbols (a
number which, though unimaginably vast, is not infinite)—that is, all that
is able to be expressed, in every language. All—the detailed history of the
future, the autobiographies of the archangels, the faithful catalog of the
Library, thousands and thousands of false catalogs, the proof of the falsity
of those false catalogs, a proof of the falsity of the true catalog, the gnostic
gospel of Basilides, the commentary upon that gospel, the commentary on
the commentary on that gospel, the true story of your death, the translation
of every book into every language, the interpolations of every book into
all books, the treatise Bede could have written (but did not) on the
mythology of the Saxon people, the lost books of Tacitus. 10
The Library is an infinite universe, explains the narrator of the story, but it contains a
finite number of works, which are repeated periodically. Humanity's existence under the
conditions of total information oscillates from joy to despair. The majority of the works
in the collection are, in fact, nonsensical: they often contain partial or downright fictitious
knowledge. The finest volumes in the section of the library administered by the narrator
9

10

Ibid.
Borges, Collected Fictions 113.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 78
of the story are Combed Thunder, The Plaster Cramp, and Axaxaxas mlӧ. 11 In "The Total
Library" Borges reminds his reader that his construction is profoundly dystopian,
resurrecting "a subaltern horror: the vast, contradictory Library, whose vertical
wildernesses of books run the incessant risk of changing into others that affirm, deny, and
confuse everything like a delirious god." 12
At this point of the genealogy we are able to discover several recurring
conversations that seem to hinge on the interpretation of the combinatorial composition
trope (and often the IMT in particular).

Critical Positions
The first conversation concerns the questions of identity, authenticity, originality,
and generally authorship. Nelson Goodman and Catherine Elgin have approached the
question in the following way. Suppose there are two twins, who are sent to two different
but very similar summer camps somewhere in New England. At the end of the summer
both write brief report of their experiences, and both produce exactly identical texts.
Would we consider these documents different or identical? "Unmistakably, we have only
one text here," Goodman and Elgin write. 13 Recognizing the similarity of their thought
experiment to Borges's Pierre Menard the authors continue to say that "the case [of
Pierre Menard] is widely taken to show conclusively that a work cannot be identical with

11

Ibid 117.

12

Borges, Selected Non-fiction 216.

13

Goodman and Elgin, Reconceptions 60.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 79
a text—that Cervantes and Menard produced separate works with the same text." 14 But,
what Menard has written is simply "another inscription of the same text:"
Any of us can do the same, as can printing presses and photocopiers.
Indeed, we are told, if infinitely many monkeys were to type for an
infinitely long time, one would eventually produce a replica of the text.
That replica, we maintain, would be as much an instance of the work Don
Quixote as Cervantes' manuscript, Menard's manuscript, and each copy of
the book that ever has been or will be printed. That the monkey may be
supposed to have produced his copy randomly makes no difference. It is
the same text and is open to all the same interpretations, as the instance
consciously inscribed by Cervantes, Menard, and the various anonymous
copyists, printers, and typesetters who produced instances of the work.
Questions of the intention or intelligence of the producer of a particular
inscription are irrelevant to the identity of the work. 15
Rather than writing a new text, Menard has merely invented a new interpretation of the
original, according to Goodman. 16 In the case of the twins, the texts are similarly
identical. We should treat the identical camp notes as we treat simultaneous inventions by
scientists unfamiliar with each other's work: both should be credited with the discovery. 17
A consequence of this line of reasoning is that reading one twin's note would
amount to reading the other's. To read Pierre Menard's Don Quixote is to read Don
Quixote by Cervantes. In an essay on the identity of works of art, Goodman goes further

14

Ibid 61-62.

15

Goodman and Elgin, Reconceptions 62. Also quoted in Genette 242-243.

16

Ibid 62-63.

17

Ibid 64.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 80
to maintain that it would be impossible to deny that he has read Don Quixote, whether the
text "happens to have been accidentally produced by a mad printer in 1500, or by a mad
computer in 1976." 18 Goodman's argument seems to dampen some of the rhetorical force
implicit in the Infinite Monkey Theorem. On his view, to wait for monkeys to compose
Shakespeare is a particularly inefficient mode of photocopying. The photocopy does the
same job quicker, and without much existential anguish on our part. A copy is a copy is a
copy. Of course by the same logic, we could conclude that the simple act of
photocopying documents should not seem so banal to us, and that it should hold the same
metaphysical wonder as Pierre Menard's Don Quixote or the monkey's Hamlet.
Another problematic consequence of Goodman's argument stems from the
temporal sequencing of the events in his examples. Menard's Don Quixote comes after
the same by Cervantes, and despite the ontologically uncertain status of its creation as an
original work of art, we must agree with Goodman that at the very least the text can be
considered a copy of the original. That is to say that that "originality" here can be defined
in simple temporal terms as in "having been invented before." Things begin to look
slightly more muddled when the two identical texts are co-created at the same time, as
was the case with the twins experiment. Goodman, if you remember, suggests we treat
that case as independent co-invention of the same thing.
But what are we to do with the copy that precedes the original? Is this even a
logical possibility? In the disturbing dystopia of the total library: most definitely. The
total library precludes all further original thought, as all combinations of words and

18

Goodman, Of Mind 140.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 81
letters, sensical and nonsensical, are already accounted for through pure, blind
combination. In the conclusion of Pierre Menard, Pierre speaks precisely against such an
oppressive idea of originality:
"Thinking, meditating, imagining," he also wrote me, "are not anomalous
acts—they are the normal respiration of the intelligence. To glorify the
occasional exercise of that function, to treasure beyond price ancient and
foreign thoughts, to recall with incredulous awe what some doctor
unverisalis thought, is to confess our own languor, or our own barbarie.
Every man should be capable of all ideas, and I believe that in the future
he shall be." 19
There is nothing privileged in the mere act of thinking something for the first time,
Menard seems to say. The thought is no less "original" when thought anew, within
different time and context. Any idea of originality that privileges temporal progression is
bound to be susceptible to the sheer creative potential of blind combinatory poetics. Our
problem is not with monkeys re-inventing Hamlet, but with monkeys inventing texts that
have not yet seen the light of their human invention.
A position contrary to the one expressed by Goodman and Elgin is taken up by
Gerard Genette in his 1994 L'Oeuvre de l'art: Immanence et Transcendence, translated in
1997 into English as The Work of Art: Immanence and Transcendence. For Genette, the
obvious lesson of "Pierre Menard" is that the text is different from the work of art
(precisely along the lines of immanence and transcendence), in that the meaning of the

19

Borges, Collected Fictions 91.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 82
text is inseparable from the context of its production, which Genette equates with
interpretation. He writes:
The difference between "monkey" as typed by Jimbo [a monkey] and
"monkey" as typed by his master does not derive from a difference in
denotation, but, rather, from the fact that the second word is typed in very
ordinary fashion by a human being, while the other is typed by an animal
[...] the two words (or two sentences) are identical by virtue of their
syntactical and semantic/literal identity, but differ as works, by virtue of
disparity between 'their histories of production'; this genetic difference
gives rise to a difference in meaning beyond identity of literal meanings. 20
By extension, the two copies of Don Quixote do not have the same meaning for Genette,
since the same sign does not share the same denotation within differing contexts of
production: the diction considered normative in the eighteenth century, is archaic in the
twentieth. 21
To further bolster his case, Genette cites R.G. Collingwood, who takes a slightly
different approach to IMT in his 1938 classic on aesthetic theory, The Principles of Art.
"Works cannot be produced by accident," writes Collingwood recalling the trope of
simian composition. The reader who has nothing to do can calculate how long it would
take for the monkeys to actually reproduce a complete text by Shakespeare, he writes.
"But the interest in the suggestion likes in the revelation of the mental state of a person
who can identify the 'works' of Shakespeare with the series of letters printed on the pages
of a book bearing the phrase as its title; and who thinks, if he can be said to think at all,

20

Genette 247-248.

21

Genette 248.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 83
that an archeologist of 10,000 years hence, recovering a complete text of Shakespeare
from the sands of Egypt but unable to read a single word of English, would possess
Shakespeare's dramatic and poetic works." 22 Collingwood's modification to the original
thought experiment is interesting, because it shifts the burden of creativity from
composition to comprehension. The composition of texts following some blind
combinatory algorithm (or the much slower simian variety) is a relatively trivial problem
for Collingwood. The difficulty is in recognizing the singular work of art from the
overwhelmingly large pile of non-sensical or near-sensical linguistic detritus. In other
words, it is easy to construct a machine that spews out random texts. The difficulty comes
in teaching the monkey to read—not as mere annunciation, but as true understanding.
The disagreement between Genette and Goodman thus seems to fall along the
lines of the familiar distinction between intentionalist and functionalist approaches to
artificial intelligence. The intentionalists, like Genette and John Searle among others,
would argue that to produce a work of art one must have the appropriate mental state, or
the intention to do so. The functionalists, like Goodman 23 and Daniel Dennett among
others, would attempt to bracket the internal state of the author as unattainable. We can
anticipate that a philosopher so committed to the functionalist position may object that in
Genette's example we cannot truly know that the given word is typed by the human "in an
ordinary fashion." It could for example, be the case that the monkey's handler has an IQ

22

Collingwood 126, also quoted in Genette 243-244.

23

Goodman may object to this label, but at least in this conversation, I think it is fair to call his
argument functional in that it disregards the mental state of the author, treating the text as an
external, functional manifestation only.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 84
lower than that of the primate, or that when he or she was typing the word "monkey" he
really thought and meant to type "donkey." It could also be the case that the monkey was
faithfully copying the words of the master, and that in typing the very same word
ourselves we sometimes do little more than mimic the normative idiom of the times.
Collingwood's addendum does little to take us out of the standstill between intentionalist
and functional accounts of the creative process. Reading, as we know from Wittgenstein,
is susceptible to all of the same pitfalls as writing. 24
I will follow Genette's reasoning here in my refusal to mediate a compromise
between these two contradictory positions. Intentionalism and functionalism for me are
ultimately methodological distinctions, the merits of which lie in the theoretical insights
they produce in the context of the given analysis. 25 Suffice it to say for now that neither
account seems to offer a satisfactory reading of "Pierre Menard" or "The Library of
Babel." Both Goodman and Genette read the two stories as advocating, in a relatively
unambiguous way, a specific philosophical position. "The case [of Pierre Menard] is
widely taken to show conclusively that a work cannot be identical with a text," Goodman
and Elgin write in Reconceptions. 26 Similarly, in Genette we find: "Borges clearly agrees
with Goodman (and everyone else) that the text produced by Menard is that of Don
Quixote." 27 And yet, the genealogy of these thought experiments suggests that Borges is

24

For a detailed discussion of this point see Chapter One.

25

Genette makes a similar argument for his distinction between immanence and transcendence
(Genette 243).

26

Goodman and Elgin, Reconceptions 62.

27

Genette 122.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 85
at the very least aware of the trope's satirical potential (hence its use by Swift and
Carroll). The new interpretation of the same text could say something about the
ontological status of the text as an art object. Alternatively, it could be read as a ridicule
of relativism, or a challenge to our notions of creativity. The total library is a similarly
ambiguous thought experiment. It offers us a glimpse of a beautiful but perhaps
ultimately oppressive universe, and at the end of the day it is not clear whether Borges
means the image to be an inspiration, a prophecy, or a warning about the state of the
human being within a combinatorial universe, saturated with authorless and often
senseless information.

Numbers
Perhaps it would have surprised Robin George Collingwood to know that many
readers familiar with the trope of the IMT were quite interested in thinking about the
math behind the thought exercise, and some went as far as to replicate the conditions of
the experiment with actual simians.
One of the most important precursors to "The Library of Babel" was the 1901
"The Universal Library," an essay by Kurd Lasswitz. Lasswitz was and remains an
interesting figure in German letters—a mathematician and a physicist by training, he
went on to write several important literary works, which influenced writers like Borges
and H.G. Wells and cemented his status as "the father of German Science Fiction." 28 The
"The Universal Library" begins with the meeting of two old friends, Professor

28

Fischer 257-258.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 86
Wallhausen and Max Burkel, a magazine editor. Burkel solicits an article from
Wallhausen, but the latter is reluctant to acquiesce, because he has no good ideas at the
moment, and because it seems to him that anything worth saying has already been said
before. But the human mind is inexhaustible, objects Burkel. The professor, now
speaking in the role of the mathematician considers the possibility in the following way:
"we will take our one hundred characters, repeat them in any order often enough to fill a
volume which has room for one million characters, we'll get a piece of literature of some
kind. Now if we produce all possible combinations mechanically we'll ultimately get all
the works which ever have been written in the past or can be written in the future." 29
The thought seems implausible to the editor, but the professor asks his daughter to
fetch a sheet of paper, a pencil, and a logarithmic table to make the necessary calculations
and after some further consideration Burkel subscribes to the thought experiment. This is
wonderful for both editor and publisher," he exclaims: "the elimination of the author from
the literary business! The replacement of the writer by the automatic printing press! A
triumph of technology!" 30
The prospect of universal knowledge through combination quickly turns sour,
however. The universal library must contain an overwhelming amount of noise, in
comparison to the relative paucity of meaningful information. Burkel and Wallhausen
imagine innumerable volumes with false Faust and mangled Shakespeare. It would be
"impossible to sift truth from falsehood, sense from nonsense," Burkel proclaims: "If I

29

Fadiman 236-238.

30

Ibid 239.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 87
find several million volumes all claiming to be the true history of Germany during the
twentieth century and all contradicting each other, I would do much better by reading the
original works of the historians." 31 The professor then approximates the number of
volumes in the library to be 102,000,000. Furthermore, Wallhausen concludes that if we
were to pack 1000 volumes from our library into one cubic meter, there would not be
enough space in the universe to contain the library. 32
From the literary point of view "The Universal Library" is relatively
unremarkable, except in that it belongs to a somewhat liminal genre. Although it
appeared first in a volume of short stories by the author it is not a story as such, but rather
more like an essay inviting the reader to participate in a particular mathematical, rather
than a literary, thought experiment. It falls short of being a scientific essay however, by
the virtue of exhibiting a marked literary disposition: a fictional setting, and a set of
fictional characters. The closest relatives in this genre would be essays or short stories by
Lewis Carroll, which often deploy a similar mix of logic games, math, and fiction to
entertain and educate a younger audience (or at least, an audience not familiar with the
basic principles of logic or mathematics). To this genre we can also attribute Edwin
Abbott Abbott's 33 1884 Flatland, the 1949 The Man Who Counted 34 by the Brazilian
writer Júlio César de Mello e Souza, and countless other stories by among others, G.K.

31

Ibid 241.

32

Ibid 241-243.

33

Sic.

34

O Homem que Calculava in the original Portugese title.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 88
Chesterton, Edward Page Mitchell, Robert A. Heinlein, Martin Gardner, and Arthur C.
Clarke. The genre I am trying to identify here seems to have matured in the late
nineteenth century, and is characterized by the introduction of mathematics, geometry,
and logic games into fiction; it is often educational or popularizing in nature, in that it
invites that audience to participate in a thought experiment that illustrates a particular
concept; and finally, at its best, the genre uses mathematical insight to push at the
boundaries of literary convention. Borges and Vladimir Nabokov would probably count
among the most accomplished practitioners of this genre, which we could roughly call
mathematical parable. 35
Several mathematicians have elaborated upon Lasswitz's calculations. In 1929
Doctor Theodor Wolff suggested to substitute a number of volumes containing a million
positions each, as is the premise in Lasswitz, with a greater number of single sheets, each
containing one thousand characters. Wolff further reduced the number of characters used
for the combination to come up with a more "manageable" approximation of the universal
library to be composed of 251000 single sheets. 36 In a popular 1947 book that introduces
the concept of infinity to a wider audience, George Gamow even suggests a prototype
mechanical press that could, if set in motion for long enough, "print everything that was
ever written from the time people learned to write: every line of prose and poetry, every
editorial and advertisement from newspaper, every ponderous volume of scientific

35

I am indebted to a discussion with Jacob Emery of Indiana University for the designation.

36

Ley 246.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 89
treatises, every love letter, every note to a milkman..." (Figure 3.1). 37 Gamow estimates
the number of combinations at 10110. This seems to be a slightly smaller number than
Lasswitz's initial estimation, but as Gamow reminds his reader, even if every atom in the
universe was a printing press working for three billion years, it would still produce only
about one thirtieth of one percent of the total number required. 38

Figure 3.1: "An automatic printing press that has just printed correctly a line from
Shakespeare."
But most important, such an experiment is doomed to fail because we would need
yet a more complicated machine, requiring more time and resources, to separate the nonsense from meaningful text. As Willy Ley concludes in a postscript to "The Universal

37

Gamow 12.

38

Ibid 14.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 90
Library," "the elimination of the author from the literary business has been proved to be a
glorious failure. The editor will still have to read manuscripts." 39
I am in no position to evaluate the math in these examples, nor do I intend to
provide the complete bibliography on the topic. It is merely my intention to contextualize
the IMT (and the two stories by Borges along with it) within a genealogy of particular
texts, and in the process to unearth a set of problems that seem to underlie the stratum of
such disparate disciplines as mathematics, literature, information theory, zoology,
theology, and aesthetics.

Creativity as Intelligent or Unintelligent Design
Works of art cannot be produced by accident, argue some critics. But it may
surprise those who come to the insight by intuition that the same argument, unfolded
along similar material is often used to argue for intelligent design in the conversation
about evolution. William A. Dembski is perhaps one the most vociferous proponents of
this view. His argument unfolds in terms of what he calls "specified complexity." Chance
cannot generate information both complex and specified, Dembski argues. Were aliens to
chance on a Shakespearean sonnet (or humans on an alien Shakespeare) we would have
to conclude that the text was the designed product of an intelligent being. "Consider a
typist at a keyboard," he writes:
By randomly typing a long sequence of letters, the typist will generate
complex unspecified information: the precise sequence of letters typed
will constitute a highly improbable unspecified event, yielding complex

39

Ley 247.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 91
unspecified information. Alternatively, the typist, if typing randomly,
might by chance type the short sequence of letters t-h-e, thereby
generating non-complex specified information [...] what random typing
cannot do is produce an extended meaningful text, thereby generating
information that is both complex and specified." 40
In other words, to be considered for specified complexity, the text must be long and
meaningful. The complexity part of the equation seems at first relatively unproblematic,
and should already be familiar to the reader. As a threshold for complexity Dembski, like
Gamow, chooses the number of atoms in the universe, which for him yields 10150
combinations, which translates into 500 bits of information. "The universe will
experience her death before random typing at a keyboard produces a Shakespearean
sonnet," concludes Dembski. 41
To this claim Richard Dawkins, the British evolutionary biologist, responds with
an elegant literary experiment based on evolutionary principles. Dawkins proposes to
replicate Hamlet's conversation with Polonius, from the second scene of the third act in
Hamlet:
Ham. Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
Pol. By the mass, and't is like a camel, indeed.
Ham. Methinks it is like a weasel.
Pol. It is backed like a weasel.
Ham. Or like a whale?
Pol. Very like a whale.

40

Dembski, Intelligent Design 165-166.

41

Ibid 166.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 92
The line in question is "METHINKS IT IS LIKE A WEASEL." To produce this line,
Dawkins has designed a computer program that, given a seed of random characters, will
mutate it and compare the results with the target phrase. It will then select mutations most
similar to the target phrase for "breeding" to produce new "generations" of text that begin
to approach the target phrase. Thus, the tenth generation produces "MDLDMNLS
ITJISWHRZREZ MECS P", the twentieth "MELDINLS IT ISWPRKE Z WECSEL", and
the thirtieth "METHINGS IT ISWLIKE B WECSEL". The target phrase, "METHINKS
IT IS LIKE I WEASEL" was produced by the forty-third generation. 42 The universe did
not expire in the process.
The intelligent design community rejected the experiment as mere duplication of
an existing text, not creativity, arguing that the experiment would be impossible without
the existing line from Shakespeare. 43 Only a small modification of the original
experiment would be required to compensate for that objection, however. To simulate
evolutionary pressures one would only need some parameters—any parameters—that
would ensure the survival of a particular generation. We could for example, randomly
jumble words and have a human subject rate each random combination on its poetic
merits. Some new text would be produced in that experiment. The generations of texts
would soon begin to look suspiciously like drafts. In fact, we could say that all human
composition works along these lines, with the exception being that the human mind is
able to bypass countless meaningless combinations to concentrate on the most promising

42

Dawkins "Creation" 34 and The Blind Watchmaker 46-51.

43

Multiple sources from Creation Ministries International at http://creation.com/weasel-wordscreation-magazine-critique-of-dawkins, last accessed on 3/23/2011.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 93
specimens. It could be said that the literary specimens adapt to the pressures of the given
cultural context. But just like biological evolution, literary evolution does not proceed
towards a particular goal. Species of rodents gain and subsequently lose sight as a result
of specific adaptations, just like the novel may oscillate between periods of realism and
impressionism, for example.
When it comes to literary evolution, complexity does not seem to be a problem.
The second part of Dembski's equation is specification. What does it mean to have
specified complexity? On page 128 of his book, Dembski defines specificity as a property
"that ensures that the object exhibits the type of pattern characteristic of intelligence." 44
This works very well for the literary example accompanying Dembski's argument, since
we take literature to be precisely a pattern characteristic of intelligent beings. Specified
complexity is utter nonsense when it comes to the natural world however. According to
the definition, we can infer intelligence when we encounter a complex string of
information or an object characteristic of intelligence. But trees, hurricanes, and DNA
sequences are precisely not information or objects characteristic of intelligent beings—
unless one already believes in an intelligent (and therefore human-like) creator. Inferring
intelligent design based on specified complexity so defined is a blatant tautology.
Specification, in Dembski's understanding, is merely a synonym for intelligence. And of
course it stands to reason that intelligent complexity is a product of intelligence. The
reasoning merely replicates the preconceived assumptions of the author. Such muddled
thinking cannot serve as "an alternative to naturalism" as Dembski aspires for his theory

44

Ibid 128.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 94
of information. That this is poor science is evident to a non-specialist, but it is also poor
theology. Remarkably, Dembski and his supporters claim important implications for "all
humane studies" including literary criticism. 45 In fact, Dembski sees his work as a type
of natural semiotics. "The premodern logic of signs described in this chapter was
perfectly well understood by premodern thinkers but utterly lost on modern and
postmodern thinkers," he writes. "My aim in this book then is to take this premodern
logic of signs and make it rigorous." 46 Despite these grandiose claims, Dembski
argument is based on a broken analogy between natural and literary creation. He
imagines the work of the scientist being something akin to the work of a "textual critic,"
whose task it is to "recover as much of the original text of an ancient manuscript as
possible." Heidegger advanced a similarly-minded program of philological reconstruction
in his philosophy, but it today it finds little resonance among scholars of literature, to say
nothing of natural scientists. For Dembski both nature and literature move with a sense of
purpose, imparted by the original creator. But art is, by definition, that which is removed
from a purely functional realm. A poem may have its creator, but poetry is a system
without explicit aims—meandering and vagrant, responding to blind and contingent
forces of shared development.

45

Ibid 10, in the "Foreword" by Michael Behe, another prominent advocate of intelligent design.

46

Ibid 47.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 95

Watching the Bees Dance
Can a work of art be produced by chance? In 2002 a group of British artists used a
troupe of Sulawesi Macaque from the Paignton Zoo to produce what may possibly be the
first published work by simians: Notes Towards the Complete Works of Shakespeare,
ISBN 0-9541181-2-X. The text was produced as part of an art installation, which, judging
by the pictures available at vivaria.net, involved macaques messing around with a
keyboard and a webcam on the one end, and the art gallery audience doing something not
entirely dissimilar on the other [Figure 3.2].

Figure 3.2:Technical diagram provided by vivaria.net

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 96
As one would expect the resultant text is an uninterrupted string of letters. On one
page, the long series of S's is interrupted by the long "ghhhhhhhhhhhh":

[...]sssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssss
sssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssss
ssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssghhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh
hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhssssssssssssssssssssssssssssss
sssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssss
sssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssss
s[...] 47

We could interpret the "ghhhhhhhhh" as a sign of simian exasperation with
human language, technology, or the art world. But, of course letters technically mean
nothing. And yet the text is undeniably readable, for it enters into the history of a trope—
a history that I have tried to outline here.
In a statement of purpose, the curators of the exhibition, identified only as
SPACEX & STAR, talk about raising questions about "the role of chance in evolution
and the creative process" and about their dissatisfaction with the traditional Darwinian
account of evolution. "Creativity is neither random nor entirely predetermined," they
write. 48 I am not entirely convinced by this curatorial description. The monkeys are

47

Elmo, Gum, Heather, et.al.

48

http://vivaria.net/experiments/notes/documentation/ last accessed 3/23/2011.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 97
relatively uninteresting as authors. A far more radical act is the insertion of the hybrid
animal-human author construct into the sphere of cultural activity usually reserved for
humans alone. Notes Towards the Complete Works of Shakespeare is both copyrighted
and given a unique International Standard Book Number (ISBN) under the names of the
macaques: Elmo, Gum, Heather, Holly, Mistletoe, and Rowan. The move further erodes
the distinction between natural and man-made culture, challenging the notion of culture
as a sphere of distinctly human activity. We may not want to read many texts written by
monkeys, but when the entomologists tell us that bees are capable of symbolic language
through dance, 49 we may consider the possibilities of true artistic collaboration. Why
don't we gather to watch the bees dance? In a sense we do. Animal Planet and the
Discovery Channel have capitalized on our fascination with animal behavior for decades.
But in thinking about art and culture our categories are still limited by anthropocentric
approaches to the creative process.
The trope of the Infinite Monkey Theorem further suggests a confluence between
our ideas of animal and artificial intelligence. Besides watching bees dance, I think we
should also seriously consider growing texts organically—through the combination of
algorithm, mutation, and adaptation suggested in the Dawkins experiment. A text
produced in that way would not be a product of purely artificial intelligence, but a natural
artifact. We would read it as we would gaze upon the hunt of the lion, or the infinitely
intricate machinations of an anthill.

49

See Frisch, Karl von. The Dance Language and Orientation of Bees. Cambridge,
Mass: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1967.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 98
I have said little that was very novel here, which I suppose is appropriate in an
essay on combinatorial poetics. The excitement of archival work—the almost forensic
drive to reconstruct a forgotten conversation—gives way to insecurity and despair. This
must be the horrid dream of every writer—to imagine his or her text languishing on the
shelves of the ever-expanding near-infinite library—the possibility of this text being
close to meaningless, containing a mere pastiche of original material. And yet, I hope—
no, believe—that the textual permutation presented here was not wholly derivative, and
that in writing and rewriting history it is possible to create new meanings and new
contexts for literary production. Is it possible to produce new information? The history of
the IMT points to a "yes," but with "further experimentation."

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 99

Works Cited
Abbott, Edwin Abbott. Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions. London: Seeley,
1884.
Aristotle and W. D. Ross. Aristotle's Metaphysics: A Revised Text with Introduction
and Commentary. Oxford: Clarendon, 1975.
Berger, John. "Why Look at Animals?" in About Looking. New York: Pantheon
Books, 1980, pp. 3-28.
Bloch, William Goldbloom. The Unimaginable Mathematics of Borges' Library of
Babel. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Borel, Émile. "Mécanique Statistique et Irréversibilité,'' J. Phys. 5e série, vol. 3, 1913,
pp.189-196.
Borges, Jorge Luis, and Andrew Hurley. Collected Fictions. New York, N.Y., U.S.A.:
Viking, 1998.
Borges, Jorge Luis, and Eliot Weinberger. Selected Non-Fictions. New York: Penguin
Books, 1999.
Campbell, Donald T. "Blind variation and selective retentions in creative thought as in
other knowledge processes." Psychological Review 67, no. 6 (November 1960):
380-400.
Carroll, Lewis, John Tenniel, and Alexander Woollcott. The Complete Works of Lewis
Carroll with an Introduction. London: Nonesuch Press, 1939.
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, and Charles Duke Yonge. On the Nature of the Gods, On
Divination, On Fate, On the Republic, On the Laws, and On Standing for the
Consulship. London: George Bell, 1907.
Collingwood, R. G. The Principles of Art. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1938.
Dawkins, Richard. "Creation and Natural Selection" in New Scientist, Sep 25, 1986,
pp. 34-38.
Dawkins, Richard. The Blind Watchmaker. New York: Norton, 1986.
Dembski, William A. "Randomness By Design" in Noûs Vol. 25, No. 1 (Mar., 1991),
pp. 75-106.
Dembski, William A. The Design Inference: Eliminating Chance Through Small
Probabilities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 100
Dembski, William A. Intelligent Design: The Bridge between Science & Theology.
Downers Grove, Ill: InterVarsity Press, 1999.
Elmo, Gum, Heather, Holly, Mistletoe and Rowan, Sulawesi Crested Macaques
(Macaca Nigra) from Paignton Zoo Environmental Park (UK). Notes Towards the
Complete Works of Shakespeare. First Published for [VIVARIA.NET] in 2002,
Produced by STAR in collbaoration with limbomedia, Signwave & Book Works.
Vivaria.net last accessed on 3/23/2011.
Fischer, William B. "German Theories of Science Fiction: Jean Paul, Kurd Lasswitz,
and After." Science Fiction Studies Vol. 3, No. 3, Science Fiction before Wells
(Nov., 1976), pp. 254-265.
Ford, Cameron. "A Theory of Individual Creative Action in Multiple Social
Domains." The Academy of Management Review Vol. 21, No. 4 (Oct., 1996), pp.
1112-1142.
Frisch, Karl von. The Dance Language and Orientation of Bees. Cambridge, Mass:
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1967.
Gamow, George. One, Two, Three ... Infinity; Facts & Speculations of Science. New
York: Viking Press, 1947.
Genette, Gérard, and G. M. Goshgarian. The Work of Art: Immanence and
Transcendence. Ithaca: Cornell Univeristy Press, 1997.
Goodman, Nelson. Of Mind and Other Matters. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University
Press, 1984.
Goodman, Nelson and Catherine Z. Elgin. "Interpretation and Identity: Can the Work
Survive the World?" Critical Inquiry Vol. 12, No. 3 (Spring, 1986), pp. 564-575.
Goodman, Nelson, and Catherine Z. Elgin. Reconceptions in Philosophy and Other
Arts and Sciences. Indianapolis: Hackett Pub. Co, 1988.
Koestler, Arthur. The Case of the Midwife Toad. New York: Random House, 1972.
Lasswitz, Kurd. "The Universal Library" in Fantasia Mathematica; Being a Set of
Stories, Together with a Group of Oddments and Diversions, All Drawn from the
Universe of Mathematics ed. Clifton Fadiman. New York: Simon and Schuster,
1958, pp. 237-244.
Lewis, Gilbert Newton. The Anatomy of Science. New Haven: Yale university press;
London, H. Milford, Oxford university press, 1926.
Ley, Willy. "Postscript to 'The Universal Library'" in Fantasia Mathematica; Being a
Set of Stories, Together with a Group of Oddments and Diversions, All Drawn from

Intelligent and Unitelligent Design | 101
the Universe of Mathematics ed. Clifton Fadiman. New York: Simon and Schuster,
1958, pp. 244-248.
Schooler, Jonathan W. and Sonya Dougal. "Why Creativity Is Not like the Proverbial
Typing Monkey." Psychological Inquiry Vol. 10, No. 4 (1999), pp. 351-356.
Shapiro, Fred R. The Yale Book of Quotations. New Haven: Yale University Press,
2006.
Simonton Dean Keith. "Creativity as Blind Variation and Selective Retention: Is the
Creative Process Darwinian?" Psychological Inquiry Vol. 10, No. 4 (1999), pp.
309-328.
Swift, Jonathan, Temple Scott et.al. "A Tritical Essay upon the Faculties of the Mind."
The Prose Works of Jonathan Swift, Volume 1. London: G. Bell, 1897, pp. 291-296.
Wollheim, Richard. "Are the Criteria of Identity that Hold for a Work of Art in
Different Arts Aesthetically Relevant?" Ratio 20, 1978, pp. 29-48.

Heidegger's Legacy | 102

Chapter 4
Heidegger's Legacy and the Cognitive Style of Intermedia
What is concrete poetry? In answer to that
question, Emmett Williams wrote that it is poetry
"beyond paraphrase, a poetry that often asked to be
completed or activated by the reader—the word,
not words, words, words, or expressionistic
squiggles—using the semantic, visual, and
phonetic elements of the past." It is "a kind of
game, perhaps […] born out of the times, as a way
of knowing and saying something about the times,
with the technique and insights of now." 1 In this
Figure 4.1: "Sometimes" by Emmett
Williams, Selected Shorter
Poems1950-1970

chapter, I want to capture something about the
times of Emmett Williams—the times of
Something Else Press, which in the 1960s
published the works of Daniel Spoerri, George

Brecht, Marshall McLuhan, Dieter Roth, John Cage, and Dick Higgins among many
other artists, poets, and musicians associated with the Concrete poetry and Fluxus art
movements. But this chapter is not about them. Fittingly, it is about the material and the

1

Anthology of Concrete Poetry, 1967, vi.

Heidegger's Legacy | 103
intellectual contexts of their work; about the intrusion of contexts into the world of
language; and about the very notion of "non-art reality" that the Fluxus Manifesto
promoted as the indeterminate, fluid, living anti-art. 2 More specifically, I would like to
consider the early history of contemporary word processing, examine the limits of its
influence on the cognitive style of information design, and finally, to argue that despite
arguments to the contrary, literature does have something to say "under the conditions of
high technology." 3

Heidegger's Cognitive Stylistics
It may seem at first a bit odd to put the words "style" and "cognition" in the same
sentence, but the concept of "cognitive style" is well-articulated in the scientific literature
on the psychology of personality. The idea of cognitive stylistics was developed first by
the American followers of Carl Jung, who like Katharine Cook Briggs and her daughter
Isabel Briggs Myers (of the still ubiquitous Myers-Briggs Type Indicator offered by
career placement centers across the country) were interested in applying insights from
quantitatively-based psychological observation (psychometrics) to problems of labor and
education. In the early 1950s, the idea of "personality type" gave way to "cognitive style"
in the work of psychologists George Klein, Philip Holzman, Riley Gardner, and Herbert

2

Maciunas, George. Fluxus Manifesto, 1963. Available online from the George Maciunas
Foundation at http://georgemaciunas.com/?page_id=42. Last accessed on 8/25/2011.

3

"Under the conditions of high technology, literature has nothing more to say" (Kittler 263).

Heidegger's Legacy | 104
Schlesinger. 4 For this new generation of scholars, the concept meant something like "the
individual differences in adaptive modes of organizing and experiencing the stimulus
world." 5 That is to say that people simply have or develop a preference for a particular
mode of thinking about and perceiving the world. Or even simpler: "everyone does it in
his own way." 6 Thus, in an early experiment Gardner observes a group of people
categorizing objects by size, shape, and color. Predictably, different people perceive the
differences between size, shape, and color in differing gradations. 7 The converse of this
experiment suggests also that certain modes of material organization favor a particular
style of thought. We may assume, for example, that certain ways of organizing the world
attract or "make sense" to a particular type of person. In the literature on education, the
concept is therefore popular within the discussion of learning styles, by which teachers
are encouraged to present their material in ways accessible to students with varying
preferences for visual, auditory, tactile, or kinesthetic learning.
The hypothesis of cognitive styles underlies a particular belief about the
connection between mental organization and the organization of objects in the real world.
It is what Heidegger called "the correlation between being, word, gathering, hand, and

4

I would venture to say under the influence of European phenomenology, and particularly the
work of Maurice Merleau-Ponty.

5

Gardner 214.

6

Gardner 216.

7

"Persons are characterized by unique equivalence-range preferences in a variety of adaptive
tasks" (Gardner 232).

Heidegger's Legacy | 105
writing" 8 and perhaps what Nietzsche meant when he wrote that "our writing tools are
also working on our thoughts." 9 Heidegger in particular is often cited in this regard. In
his meditation on Parmenides, delivered as a series of lectures during the war at the
University of Freiburg, Heidegger is clearly bothered by what he perceives as the
"irruption of the typewriter into the realm of the world of handwriting." 10 Ever in search
of essences, he imagines hand-writing to possess a special kind of magic, denoting "an
original essential nexus, to which the indicating writing-hand belongs." He continues to
say that:
[...] in handwriting the relation of Being to man, namely the word, is
inscribed in beings themselves. The origin and the way of dealing with
writing is already in itself a decision about the relation of Being and of the
word to man and consequently a decision about the comportment of man
to beings and about the way both, man and thing, stand in
unconcealedness or are withdrawn from it. 11
The typewriter somehow disturbs this idyllic picture, withdrawing "from man the
essential rank of the hand, without man's experiencing this withdrawal appropriately and
recognizing that it has transformed the relation of Being to his essence." 12 In my favorite
bit of condescension from the old master, Heidegger goes as far as to suggest that his
8

Heidegger 82.

9

Quoted in Kittler 200.

10

Ibid.

11

Heidegger "Question," 110.

12

Ibid.

Heidegger's Legacy | 106
readers misunderstand him precisely because type-setting is so groundless. "The
typewriter is a signless cloud," he writes, "a withdrawing concealment in the midst of its
very obtrusiveness […] not showing itself to its essence." "Perhaps that is why most of
you, as is proven to me by your reaction, though well-intended, have not grasped what I
have been trying to say." 13
What is Heidegger trying to say here? And what precisely is being concealed by
the typewriter? In "The Question Concerning Technology," originally published in 1954,
Heidegger explains that technology is primarily a mode of revealing truth. To make this
point, Heidegger begins with an analysis of a specific artifact—a silver chalice used for
ceremonial rights. Initially, it seems that the primary purpose of the artifact is to facilitate
something, the administration of ceremonial rites in this case. The cup is an instrument
for something, in other words; it is a means to an end. Another way to put it would be to
say that the ceremony is the cause for the cup's very existence. But there is more than just
causa finalis, as Heidegger puts it. The physical properties of silver (causa materialis)
also constitute a cause, as does the shape of the cup (causa formalis), and as does the
silversmith who has fashioned the vessel (the silversmith being causa efficiens). In fact
the cup's very instrumentality is grounded in this chain of causation. The cup is an
occasion to bring forth the ceremony; to bring forth a certain property of silver; to bring
forth the water-containing property of the vessel's shape; and finally to bring forth the
craft of the silversmith. The making of the cup is not mere "handicraft manufacture,"

13

Ibid 83.

Heidegger's Legacy | 107
Heidegger writes, nor is it "only artistic and poetical bringing into appearance and
concrete imagery," but rather a "bringing-forth, "poiesis in the highest sense." 14
At its best, technology reveals truth. At this point of the essay Heidegger makes a
distinction between traditional technology or "handicraft," and modern, machine-powered
technology. 15 Modern technology also reveals, writes Heidegger. But it does not "unfold
into a bringing-forth in the sense of poiesis." Rather modern technology is a challenge or
a provocation [Herausfordern] to nature. The figure of the natural betrays the extent of
Heidegger's romanticism. "The revealing that is modern technology is a challenging,
which puts to nature the unreasonable demand that it supply energy which can be
extracted and stored as such," writes Heidegger. 16 "But does it hold true for the old
windmill as well?" he asks. And answers,
No. Its sails do indeed turn in the wind; they are left entirely to the wind's
blowing. But the windmill does not unlock energy from the air currents in
order to store it. In contrast, a tract of land is challenged in the hauling out
of coal and ore. The earth now reveals itself as a coal mining district, the
soil as a mineral deposit. The field that the peasant formerly cultivated and
set in order appears different from how it did when to set it in order still
meant to take care of and to maintain. The work of the peasant does not
challenge the soil of the field. In sowing grain he places seed in the
keeping of the forces of growth and waits over its increase. [By contrast]

14

Heidegger "Question," 110.

15

Ibid 111.

16

Ibid 111.

Heidegger's Legacy | 108
agriculture is now the mechanized food industry. Air is now set upon to
yield nitrogen, the earth to yield ore, ore to yield uranium, for example;
uranium set upon to yield atomic energy, which can be released either for
destruction or for peaceful use. 17
The passage is remarkable for its apparent prescience of the contemporary environmental
conservation movement, which often implies a similar conservative romanticism about
handicraft technology. Both ideologies contain a particular notion of "authentic" or
"unadulterated" state of nature, which is "challenged," to use Heidegger's terminology, by
the tools of modern technology. Handicraft, by contrast, is seen as an activity that
operates in harmony with nature, without undue disturbance. This view is of course
historically incorrect. Pre-modern hunting practices and agriculture have often led to
large-scale ecological disturbances: pollution, species extinction, and deforestation. In
this context, the distinction between modern and pre-modern itself begins to seem
arbitrary. The latent romantic naturalism strains under further scrutiny. The silver chalice,
for example, can be seen as the culmination of a long and destructive process of mining,
ore processing, smelting, and manufacture, which at each stage involves the very
opposite of Heidegger's ideal non-disruptive poiesis.
A more chartable reading of the passage would attempt to place Heidegger's
critique of modern technology in the context of his phenomenology. Heidegger's
phenomenology is a weighty, but well-explored topic, and for this reason I will limit our
discussion to its most generally-known and relevant features. For Heidegger, our

17

Ibid 111-112.

Heidegger's Legacy | 109
knowledge of the world comes in two flavors: presentness-at-hand [Vorhandenheit] and
readiness-to-hand [Zuhandenheit]. When we think of some object in the world—a
hammer, to use the famous example—we first imagine something like the formal
definition of a hammer in a series of knowable facts about the object: a hammer is made
of metal and wood, we use it to pound nails, it is man's first tool, and so on. The type of
epistemological knowledge about the world, the knowledge that combines the readily
observable properties and our shared understanding of the object, is called "present-tohand" in Heidegger's system. "Ready-to-hand" knowledge by contrast is practical. I know
something about the hammer, but I also have used a hammer—and in using it I
understood the tool in an applied manner. But more than that, in using the hammer I
understand something about the nail. An essential property of the transition between
theoretical and applied knowledge of the world, is the disappearance of the tool. For
Heidegger, the tool literally becomes a kind of "sight," helping us identify properties of
the world that are particularly well-suited for its application. "Action has its own kind of
sight," Heidegger writes in Being and Time. 18 The hammer helps us experience the nail
in a hammering kind-of-a-way. Hammering reveals something about the nail, and by
extension, about metals in general. At the bottom of this experience is man's relationship
to nature itself. All "good" technologies work in that way for Heidegger. "Technology
comes to presence in the realm where revealing an unconcealment take place, where

18

Heidegger, Being and Time 99

Heidegger's Legacy | 110
aletheia, truth, happens," he writes in "The Question Concerning Technology." 19 The
plow reveals something about the earth, just as the windmill reveals something about the
air current.
Modern technology reveals too, but it breaks the "natural" phenomenological
experience in two important ways. First, the tool fails to fully disappear into the
experience. I imagine this to be the same kind of a feeling a musician has when playing
an unfamiliar instrument. The instrument "stands in the way" of the unity between man
and music. Second, the modern instrument introduces a kind of a perceptual bias. It treats
nature as a reserve of energy [Bestand]—as a kind of a storehouse, an inventory, or a
collection. Whereas the farmer's plow reveals the earth as fertile ground, the tractor
reveals it to be a mere resource for mechanized agriculture. The earth ceases to be an
object of knowledge, amenable to other ways of knowing. In this way, modern
technology works to "order" or to "enframe" matter, interfering with the very process of
truth-formation. Moreover, just as the earth ceases to be the object of knowledge, the
ordering—or to use the very un-Heideggerian term, the commodification—of natural
resources threatens to turn the human into a resource. For Heidegger, modern technology
disrupts the status of the human as a proper subject:
Only to the extent that man for his part is already challenged to exploit the
energies of nature can this revealing which orders happen. If man is
challenged, ordered, to do this, then does not man himself belong even
more originally than nature within the standing–reserve? The current talk

19

Heidegger, "The Question Concerning Technology" 111

Heidegger's Legacy | 111
about human resources, about the supply of patients for a clinic, gives
evidence of this. The forester who measures the felled timber in the woods
and who to all appearances walks the forest path in the same way his
grandfather did, is today ordered by the industry that produces commercial
woods, whether he knows it or not. He is made subordinate to the
orderability of cellulose, which for its part challenged forth by the need of
paper, which is then delivered to newspapers and illustrated magazines.
The commodification of both subject and object commodifies phenomenology itself. One
can perceive more than a hint of Marx in this line of critique.
If the plow reveals something about the earth, the pen reveals something about
language. The relationship between man and language is of a primary importance to
Heidegger. In the realm of language, man stands in relation to being itself. Heidegger's
own discourse often progresses through a series of etymological reconstructions, which
contain an almost mystical sense of reverence for the veracity of meaning contained in
the original, Greek understanding of a given concept. By similar logic, the hand
represents a "pure," unadulterated relationship of man to language. The hand "contains an
essence of the human being because the word, as the essential region of the hand, is the
essential ground of being human." 20 In the metaphoric juxtaposition between word and
ground, the analogy between pen and plow becomes apparent. And just like mechanized
agriculture, mechanized writing "deprives the hand of dignity in the realm of the written

20

Heidegger Parmenides, 119.

Heidegger's Legacy | 112
word and degrades the word to a mere means for the traffic of communication." 21 The
typewriter commodifies language in other words, turning it into the "standing reserve" of
information. "In mechanized writing all humans begin to look the same," writes
Heidegger. 22

Intermedia as Syncopation between Human, Machine, and Language
It has been suggested that Heidegger's distaste for mechanized writing stemmed
from his inability to type. 23 Don Ihde, a contemporary authority on Heidegger's
philosophy of technology, suggests that all new mechanisms go through an awkward
stage of sorts, in which they still feel unfamiliar to us, and therefore disruptive in the way
an unfamiliar instrument is "in the way" of music for a musician. But with time, these
technologies once again become transparent to us, and the link between man and
language is once again restored in the fluent hands of a nimble typist. 24 Such an attempt
to "de-romanticize" 25 Heidegger's argument cannot fully diffuse the rhetorical force of
his critique. Heidegger's romanticism continues to exert considerable influence on
contemporary thought, particularly when it comes to the discussion about emerging
technology, and especially in the fields of literary and cultural studies. Perhaps the most
21

Ibid.

22

Ibid.

23

Ihde 120-127.

24

Ibid.

25

Ihde's sometimes explicit goal.

Heidegger's Legacy | 113
visible (in a sense of well-known and often-cited) example of this trend is Friedrich
Kittler's 1986 Gramophone, Film, Typewriter. In the conclusion of this book-length
study, Kittler brings the Heideggerian rhetoric to its natural paranoiac crescendo: "A
simple feed-back loop—and information machines bypass humans—their so-called
inventors […] Electronics, a tube monster since Bletchley Park, replaces discourse, and
programmability replaces free will […] Under the condition of high technology, literature
has nothing more to say. It ends in cryptograms that defy interpretation and only permit
interception." As evidence for this vision, Kittler submits a letter/poem which resembles
a nonsensically-encoded communiqué addressed to Truman, Roosevelt, Stalin, and
Churchill. 26
A more tempered position, along the same Heideggerian lines, was advanced by
Erich Kahler, a prominent American literary critic writing in the 1960s, who saw the
history of the avant-garde movements in the 20th century following a downward
trajectory of formal disintegration—from the initial purging of sentiment in the nouveau
roman, to the dissolution of language in the final "typographical stage" of literary
development. 27 Kahler's ultimate worry was over what he called "the triumph of
incoherence," which leads to "the dissolution of the linguistic form," "the divorce of
language from its human source," and finally, to the destruction of consciousness itself

26

Kittler 258-263.

27

Kahler 87, referring to the poetry of the German concretist, Franz Mon.

Heidegger's Legacy | 114
(when consciousness for him is defined as coherent perception of the world 28). "What
started as poetry," writes Kahler, "ends up in typography." 29 "Under the fanfares of
thrilling innovations sounding everywhere, from Brazil to Iceland, literature fades away,
not only into graphics, but into motley sound associations and mechanistic
regimentation:"
The overwhelming preponderance of collectivity with its scientific,
technological and economic machinery, the daily flow of new discoveries
and inventions that perpetually change aspects and habits of thought and
practice, the increasing incapacity of individual consciousness to cope
with the abstract anarchy of its environment, and its surrender to a
collective consciousness that operates anonymously and diffusely in our
social and intellectual institutions—all this has shifted the center of gravity
of our world from existential to functional, instrumental, and mechanical
ways of life. At the same time the hypertrophy of functional
rationalization has produced an overcompensating irrationality, reversing
to the bodily concrete or spiraling to the absurd. Hence the products of the
avant-gardes display a strange blend of erratic imaginative vagaries with
technological and pseudo-scientific aspirations. Fragments of unconscious
and sensory experience are in a ghostly manner treated with an exactitude
derived from the rational consciousness and information. 30
I take Kahler's reaction to concrete poetry as an eloquent, if somewhat misguided,
expansion of Heidegger's "typewriters are ruining things" thesis. The argument is again a
28

Kahler 95.

29

Ibid 79.

30

Ibid 81-82.

Heidegger's Legacy | 115
restatement of the connection between technology, language, and consciousness—a triad
that resurfaces every few decades as a manifestation of our collective technophobic
hypochondria.
In my understanding, the practice of concrete poetry stands in diametric
opposition to the thesis advanced by Heidegger, Kittler, and Kahler—a vision of literary
dissolution under the conditions of high technology. The artifice of Emmett Williams's
"Sometimes" (Figure 4.1) lies in the reinserting of the writing implement into the
protected world of the poetic. The poem is impossible without the machine. Reading or
reciting it is not enough: we are meant to type, or at least to imagine typing the poem.
Classical scansion is not sufficient either. We must be able to imagine the rhythm of the
typewriter: the sharp hammer-like movement of its type-bars, the clicking of the platern,
the whizzing sound and the bell of the lever-operated carriage return. The typewriter
"thinks" in so far as it suggests a particular style—of writing, thinking—a style that has
an impetus, a logic, and a poetry of its own. The rhythmic impetus of the typewriter pulls
the poem along a particular metric trajectory. The poet disrupts that logic with a
correction. The resulting grapheme, documents the interruption, and in the process pulls
the material world into the literary. The smudge of the ribbon, the rejected versions of the
poem, the mark of the proofreader, and yes the typewriter itself—all of these "extraliterary" elements of the creative process are elevated to the status of the poetic. Another
way to describe the dynamic between literature and technology in this case, would be to
say that the concretist aesthetic appropriates the extra-functional elements of the writing
mechanism. What initially seems a mere artifact of literary production becomes art.

Heidegger's Legacy | 116
Literature thus taints technology, stripping away the pretense of pure functionalism.
Under the condition of the literary, to reverse Kittler here, technology gains a new voice.
Nothing is determined about the encounter between human, machine, and
language. Each element of this triad contains a mere suggestion of rhythm and pace. The
resulting symphony is a syncopation of all three elements. There is of course nothing
particularly modern about his dynamic. The printing press introduced a particular poetics
into the language as well. It is just that after a time, the cognitive style of the printing
press has become transparent to us, particularly after publishing had congealed into a
relatively stable system of production and distribution. The advent of the typewriter, of
desktop publishing, and of distributed, online models of publication destabilizes the
established stylistics. With each of these advancements we worry anew about the impact
of technology on our way of thinking—a concern that goes back to the introduction of
writing itself, as in Plato's Phaedrus.
The history of concrete poetry can be seen as the culmination of one such shift,
spurred on by the transference of type-setting from the printer to the author. This
dynamic may explain the simultaneous eruption of concrete poetry across multiple
literary traditions. "The confused geography of its beginnings reflects the universality of
its roots," Williams writes. 31 He then suggests the following signposts upon this
landscape: the "constellation" poetry of Eugene Gomerenger; the posters of Carlo Belloli
and F.T. Marinetti; the Noigandres poets of Sao Paulo; the work of the Danish poet

31

Williams, Anthology vi.

Heidegger's Legacy | 117
Oyvin Fahlstrom; the ideagrams of Dieter Roth; the sound-poetry experiments of the East
German poet Carlfriedrich Claus; the collaborative work of the Vienna composer
Gerhard Ruhm, architecht Friedrich Achleitner, a jazz musician Oswald Weiner, and the
poets H.C. Atmann and Konrad Bayer in the early fifties; and finally Williams's own
work with the Darmstadt Circle, which included the Kitasano Katue of Japan and the
German dramaturgist Claus Bremer. 32 To this topography we could add an increasingly
long list of "intermedial" work by Vladimir Mayakovsky and Guillame Apollinaire in the
early 1920s, several of Lewis Carroll's poetic experiments, and much work from nonwestern traditions, in alphabets that have always contained a strong visual element
(Chinese, Arabic, etc).
In this light, concrete poetry can be seen as the culmination of a particular technocognitive style—a full-blown artistic movement which peaks at the eclipse of the
typewriter age. The cognitive style of concrete poetry, if one may speak of such a thing,
is one of cross-modal perception. It literally attempts to engage areas of the brain not
normally affected by passive reading. Artists associated with Fluxus and concrete poetry
were committed to the development of what they called intermedia. In his 1966
"Statement on Intermedia," Dick Higgins, the Cambridge-born poet, composer, and
publisher, writes:
For the last ten years or so, artists have changed their media to suit this
situation, to the point where the media have broken down in their
traditional forms, and have become merely puristic points of reference.
32

Williams Anthology vi.

Heidegger's Legacy | 118
The idea has arisen, as if by spontaneous combustion throughout the entire
world, that these points are arbitrary and only useful as critical tools, in
saying that such-and-such a work is basically musical, but also poetry.
This is the intermedial [sic] approach, to emphasize the dialectic between
the media. A composer is a dead man unless he composes for all the media
and for his world. 33
The spontaneous invention of this artistic program in Switzerland, Italy, Argentina,
Germany, and the United States 34 is contemporaneous with the turn to cross-modal
perception studies in post-war psychology. At the core of this shared program is a new
understanding of cognitive stylistics. As Marshal McLuhan, himself associated with the
Fluxus movement, wrote in his 1967 Verbi-Voco-Visual Explorations, "the physics of
typographic lineality have dominated our perception." 35 But, as Kahler notes in his anticoncretist polemic, this approach has also erased the boundaries between the sociallyconstructed categories that separate the literary from the visual and auditory arts. With
that expansion come the loss of specificity and the dissolution of the protective barriers
that usually separate genre and medium. Fluxus could thus be viewed as a type of
cognitive calisthenics, designed to loosen the rigidity of fixed mental perception—a
mental rigidity reinforced by the rigidity in cultural categories (epistemology).

33

http://www.artpool.hu/Fluxus/Higgins/intermedia2.html. Originally published in Wolf Vostell
(ed.): Dé-coll/age (décollage) * 6, Typos Verlag, Frankfurt - Something Else Press, New York,
July 1967.

34

Williams, Anthology vi.

35

McLuhan 14.

Heidegger's Legacy | 119

The Stenographic Sound-Hand
Such convergence of perceptual categories means that intermedial works have
multiple phylogenetic lines of development. In looking for an alternative history of
concrete poetry (outside of the strictly literary tradition), we can turn to contemporary
ASCII 36 art—images made from the character-encoding scheme created by the American
Standard Code for Information Interchange (Appendix, Figure 4.2). ASCII visuals tend to
exist as an outside art phenomenon (as opposed to art in the gallery sense of the word).
Smiling faces, cute bunnies, butts, and tanks constructed out of keyboard characters are
usually used to introduce a visual component into an otherwise textual space: chat
windows, online forums, and email signature lines. Visual experimentation with
typography was common for constructivists, futurists, and other assorted modernists of
the early 20th century, as seen in the typographic works of Dutch artist and printer H.N.
Werkman (Appendix, Figure 4.3). But, the earliest recorded example of "typewriter art"
appeared first on the pages of Sir Isaac Pitman's The Phonotypic Journal in October of
1898, executed by one Miss Flora F. F. Stacey (Appendix, Figure 4.4). "An outsider, or
one unaccustomed to the use of the typewriter, can scarcely realize what an expenditure
of time and patience is necessary in order to execute one of these drawings. The paper
has, of course, to be turned, and re-turned, and twisted in a thousand of different
directions, and each character and letter must strike precisely in the right spot," Miss
Stacey writes in a note accompanying the drawing.
36

ASCII stands for The American Standard Code for Information Interchange, maintained by the
American National Standards Institute.

Heidegger's Legacy | 120
Painting with words was of course never limited to a particular technology of
writing. In the European tradition at least, decorative calligraphy has always contained a
visual, graphic component. The typewriter, by contrast, initially seems to be a
semiotically-rigid device: it offers only one way to render a given sign. And yet, when
compared to the printing press, it allows the typist to subvert "the physics of typographic
lineality" by experimenting with typesetting directly, without the mediation of the printer.
In Stacey's case, the continuity of the hand-drawn line must be simulated by the multiple
stokes of a discrete character set. Stacey's butterfly deserves a mention in Pitman's
journal precisely because painting with typography is such an onerous task. "Often, just
as some particular sketch is on the point of completion, a trifling miscalculation, or the
accidental depression of a wrong key, will totally ruin it, and the whole thing has to be
begun over again," writes Stacey. 37 That typewriter is a device destined for intermedia is
evidenced by the history of its (multiple) inventions. The typewriter was invented and reinvented as a machine to teach the blind to write, and alternatively a machine that allows
more rapid transcription of speech. The invention of the typewriter must be considered
against this particular history.
Transcription of speech was a major concern for the various stenographic
movements in the English-speaking world, which go back the publication of Timothy
Bright's Characterie: An Arte of Shorte, Swifte Secrete Writing by Character in 1588. In
the introduction to this slim volume, Bright writes that his work was inspired by the

37

The Phonetic Journal 10/15/1898, 661.

Heidegger's Legacy | 121
"speedie kind of writing by character" mentioned first in Plutarch's Life of Cato the
Younger, improved upon by Seneca, and then lost to history. 38
"The uses and diuers: short, that a swifte hande may therewith write
orations or publike actions of speach, uttered as becometh the grauitie of
such actions, verbatim. Secrete, as no kinde of wryting like, and herein
(besides other properties) excelling the wryting by letters, and alphabet, in
that, nations of strange languages, may hereby communicate their meaning
together in writing, through of sundrie tongues, it is reported of the of the
people of China, that they have no other kinde, and so traffike together
many Prouinces of that kingdom, ignorant one of an others speach. Their
characters are very long, and harde to make, that a dousen of mine, may be
written and soone as one of theirs; besides, they wanting an alphabet, fal
into an infinite number, which is a thing that greatlie chargeth memory,
and may discourage the learner. 39
The task of stenography then, from its early modern inception was first to bring
handwriting closer to the speed of speech, and second, to imagine a universal alphabet
that could be used by speakers of all languages and dialects. In modern terms, we might
say that stenography was concerned first and foremost with our ability to cope with an
increasing amount of information, and second with the international standardization of
character encoding (that is, with the universal transmission of information). In The
Elements of Tachygraphy, first published in 1869, David Philips Lindsley writes:

38

Bright A2.

39

Bright A2-A4.

Heidegger's Legacy | 122
Though we depend upon facilities to aid in mental and moral
advancement, as much as in physical, yet we have been slow to apply to
the mental and moral elevation of the race the principles that have enabled
us to develop our material resources. Inventions to aid in the commerce of
ideas are no less essential than those which we have realized in the
interchange of coarser commodities. The art of writing was the original
lever by which the race was at first raised above barbarism. Successive
improvements in this art have marked the epochs of the greatest mental
activity. 40
In this program we thus see the birth of the intellect augmentation movement of the midtwentieth century. The contemporary Unicode universal character encoding standard,
used for the representation of text for computer processing is the natural development of
this program. The unicode.org website mirrors Bright's Characterie in defining Unicode
as "a consistent way of encoding multilingual plain text," which "brings order to a chaotic
state of affairs that has made it difficult to exchange text files internationally." 41
By the late 19th century stenography existed as a full-blown international
movement concerned with universal spelling reform. John Westby-Gibson's The
Bibliography of Shorthand contains no fewer than twenty volumes on the subject in the
first half of the 17th century, thirty-six titles in the second half, fifty-six titles in the 18th
century, and more than four thousand entries for the 19th century. This publishing activity
was supported by the proliferation of stenographic societies across France, Germany,

40

Lindsley 19.

41

http://www.unicode.org/standard/principles.html# accessed on 3/9/2011.

Heidegger's Legacy | 123
England, and the United States—many of these with regional chapters and publication
organs. Westby-Gibson himself was editor of Shorthand; President of The Shorthand
Society from 1886 to 18887; honorary member of the Shorthand Writers' association,
London Branch; honorary member of the Manchester Shorthand Writers' Association;
honorary Secretary and founder of the International Shorthand Congress, 1887; and
finally, Chairman-elect of the Historical and Literary Section of the International
Shorthand Congress. 42 The meetings of these societies were often accompanied by public
speeches and poem recitations, dully taken down by the stenographers in attendance. The
1843 issue of the Phonotypic Journal, supported by Isaac Pitman's Phonographic
Institution contains the following several poems from the Nottingham and the
Birmingham Phonetic Festivals:
From the proceedings of the
Nottingham Phonetic Festival
June 6, 1843
Held in the Exchange Hall

Phonographers, awake, arise!
Nor think of slumber more;
This science, from our island home,
Shall spread from shore to shore

[...]
Then sound the trumpet loud,

42

Westby-Gibson from the title page.

Heidegger's Legacy | 124
Shake, shake the ethereal arch!
Till heaven re-echo, earth re-sound
The phonographic march!

Our boasted name is legion,
A host of writing men;
We'll deluge nations with our ink,
And conquer with our pen!
[great applause]

From the proceedings of the
Birmingham Phonetic Festival
July 18th 1843, Held in the Assembly Room of Dees Royal Hotel

O, this is the age for inventions! I 'm sure;
There never were heard of so many before;
We have flying aerials, drawing by light,
And a long list of other that give us delight.
The wonders of steam we may daily behold,
And science will still many glories unfold;
But sear the whole range of this busy world round,
The most wonderful wonder is Writing by Sound.
Then write away, fly away; did you not dream
That Britons ere long would be writing by steam?
Your dream's nearly true, but steam it is found
Won't do for the work, so we're writing by sound.

Heidegger's Legacy | 125
The stenographers of the 19th century understood their movement as the kind of a
global phenomenon that approximates our contemporary understanding of the internet
and social networking. Again Lindsley from The Elements of Tachygraphy:
When Tachygraphy shall be generally known and used, an electric thrill of
life will run through our communities, awakening new sympathies, and
forming bonds of union long dissevered. What railroads have done in
bringing friends together that could otherwise never interchange a visit
during a lifetime, brief writing will do, in bringing minds together that
would, without it, communicate with too much difficulty to be able to
continue the acquaintance begun in youth; and aid in extending that more
valuable interchange of thought among those of similar tastes, which tends
both to the perfection of our knowledge of science, and its general
diffusion. 43
In this project stenography and typewriting technologies compete for the same vision of
augmenting the natural human facilities of information processing and knowledge
dissemination. 44 Stenography is understood here as a thoroughly modern and
modernizing technology that does for the mental and moral development what the steam
engine and areal flight did for the material realm.

43

Lindsley 19.

44

"There certainly has been a large increase in its [tachygraphy's] professional use, but its use for
literary and business purposes has been retarded by many diverting influences. Among these
may be mentioned the introduction of type-writers. While they have done good work in some
directions, they have not relieved to any appreciable extent the labors of literary men"
(Lindsley 8).

Heidegger's Legacy | 126

Conclusion
Phonography, stenography, tachygraphy, shorthand, and typewriting—these
technologies of the word were developed consciously in an attempt to erase the boundary
between written and spoken words, in an attempt to improve the interface between mind,
language, and machine. That is to say that these are profoundly intermedial technologies,
before intermedia, and that such technologies were concerned with information
processing far before what we perceive as the boundaries of the information age.
Much is made about the distinction between sight and sound, written and oral
cultures in the contemporary study of literacy. 45 And yet these arguments are made
within a technological continuum that works to erase the boundaries between speech and
writing, print and image, shape and sound. Consider the bird's-eye view of this
continuum for a moment. Speech is a kind of technology that enables the communication
of thought. Writing is a kind of technology that enables the storage of information. Print
enables universal dissemination. Desktop publishing decentralizes knowledge production.
The internet intensifies the spread of information. Search quickens access. At the end of
this continuum is instantaneous communication without barriers and without the loss of
data. Virtual shared telepathy and real-time total recall—communication technologies
develop towards these ideals. The limits of technological development are not set by the
physical properties of the materials involved, be it silicon or graphite. The limits of the

45

See for example Barthes 1978 and 1982, Derrida 1976, and Ong 1982.

Heidegger's Legacy | 127
technology are rather set by the limits and the appetites of the human perceptual and
cognitive apparatus. 46
At this scale, the difference between oral and written cultures loses importance. A
new dichotomy emerges: between thought—the analogue, continuous, and
undifferentiated process—and its expression—speaking, writing, composing music, and
similar ways of encoding thought. These usually symbolic systems of encoding force us
to break the undifferentiated, continuous stream of thought into discrete units—delimited
by empty space, guided by normative rules of composition, and limited by the expressive
capabilities of its host technology. The broad outlines of media history is of media
moving towards the convergence of the senses—approximating and finally merging into
the stream of biological communication structures: the information exchange between
neurons, DNA replication, gene transfer, and the secretion of hormones. Paradoxically,
advances in digital technology move us closer to the analog model of perception, thought,
and communication. 47 The cognitive style of intermedia must be seen within this
movement.

46

Thus "retina displays" and similar developments.

47

Compare with Kittler's "The age of media—as opposed to the history that ends it—moves in
jerks, like Turing's paper ribbon. From the Remington, via the Turing machine, to
microelectronics; from mechanization, via automatization, to the implementation of a writing
which is cypher and not sense-one century sufficed to trans-form the ancient storage
monopoly of writing into the omnipotence of integrated circuits. Like Turing's correspondents,
everything goes from the analogous machine to the discrete" (Kittler 117-118).

Heidegger's Legacy | 128

Appendix
Figure 4.2: 0601 GIFs by A. Bill Miller 48

48

http://gridworks1.blogspot.com, last accessed on 8/25/2011.

Heidegger's Legacy | 129
Figure 4.3: H.N. Werkman, Tiksels (1923-1929)

Heidegger's Legacy | 130
Figure 4.4: Flora F. F. Stacey, 1989

Heidegger's Legacy | 131
Figure 4.5: Moore's Law

Year

1970
1981
1987
1990
1994
1997
2000
2004
2010

Price per
Gigabyte 49

$300,000
$50,000
$10,000
$1000
$100
$10
$1
$0.10

Number of Transistors
on Intel Chips 50

Benchmark
Production Planning
Model Solved Using
Linear
Programming 51

~10,000
~100,000
29.8 days
~1,000,000
~10,000,000

9.5 hours
59.1 seconds

49

Data compiled by http://ns1758.ca/winch/winchest.html, benchmarks by David S. Isenberg of
http://isen.com/blog/2011/03/the-decline-and-fall-of-disk-storage-prices/ Both last accessed on
3/8/2011.

50

I. Tuomi. The Lives and Death of Moore's Law. First Monday WWW Journal, 7(11),
November 2002. http://firstmonday.org.

51

President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology 71, quoting Grötschel. I believe
the quoted figure of 82 years in 1988 is incorrect. In personal correspondence Grötschel
indicated the figures refer to the work of Robert E. Bixby, who when contacted has sent me
the numbers I indicate here. The net increase is by a factor of 43500x according to Bixby.
The President's Councils report states that "of this, a factor of roughly 1,000 was due to
increased processor speed, whereas a factor of roughly 43,000. Grötschel also cites an
algorithmic improvement of roughly 30,000 for mixed integer programming between 1991
and 2008."

Heidegger's Legacy | 132

Works Cited
Baker, Alfred. The Life of Sir Pitman: (Inventor of Phonography). London: I. Pitman
& sons, ltd, 1913.
Bann, Stephen. Concrete Poetry: An International Anthology. London: London
Magazine, 1967.
Barthes, Roland. Empire of Signs. New York: Hill and Wang, 1982
Barthes, Roland, and Stephen Heath. Image, Music, Text. New York: Hill & Wang,
1978.
Robert E. Bixby. "Solving Real-world Linear Programs: A Decade and More of
Progress." Operations Research, Volume 50, Number 1, January-February 2002.
Bright, Timothy, and J. H. Ford. Characterie. An Arte of Shorte, Swifte and Secrete
Writing by Character. 1888.
Derrida, Jacques. Of Grammatology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1976.
Grötschel, Martin, Klaus Lucas, and V. L. Mehrmann. Production Factor
Mathematics. Heidelberg: Springer, 2010.
Heidegger, Martin. "The Origin of the Work of Art" in Basic Writings: From Being
and Time (1927) to The Task of Thinking (1964), 139-213. New York: Harper &
Row, 1977
Heidegger, Martin. Parmenides. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992.
Heidegger, Martin. "The Question Concerning Technology," in The Question
Concerning Technology, and Other Essays, 3-36. New York: Harper & Row, 1977.
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. New York: Harper, 1962.
Ihde, Don. Heidegger's Technologies: Postphenomenological Perspectives. New
York: Fordham University Press, 2010
Kahler, Erich von. The Disintegration of Form in the Arts. New York: Braziller, 1968.
Kittler, Friedrich A. Gramophone, Film, Typewriter. Stanford, Calif: Stanford
University Press, 1999.

Heidegger's Legacy | 133
Lindsley, David Philip. The Elements of Tachygraphy. Boston: O. Clapp & Son, 1890.
Maciunas, George. Fluxus Manifesto, 1963. Available online from the George Maciunas
Foundation at http://georgemaciunas.com/?page_id=42. Last accessed on 8/25/2011.

McLuhan, Marshall, and Victor J. Papanek. Verbi-Voco-Visual Explorations. New
York: Something Else Press, 1967.
Ong, Walter J. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. London:
Methuen, 1982.
Pitman, Isaac, and Samuel Bagster. Stenographic Sound-Hand. London: Samuel
Bagster, 1837.
President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. Report to the President
and Congress, Designing a Digital Future: Federally Funded Research and
Development in Networking and Information Technology. December 2010.
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/pcast-nitrd-report2010.pdf
Purvis, Alston W., and Hendrik Nicolaas Werkman. H.N. Werkman. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press, 2004.
Ronell, Avital. The Telephone Book: Technology--Schizophrenia--Electric Speech.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1989.
The Unicode Consortium. The Unicode Standard: A Technical Introduction.
http://www.unicode.org/standard/principles.html# , last accessed on 3/3/2011.
Westby-Gibson, John. The Bibliography of Shorthand. London: I. Pitman & sons,
1887.
Wildman, Eugene. Anthology of Concretism. Chicago: Swallow Press, 1969.
Williams, Emmett. An Anthology of Concrete Poetry. New York: Something Else
Press, 1967.
Williams, Emmett. Selected shorter poems, 1950-1970. Stuttgart: Edition Hansjörg
Mayer, 1978.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 134

Chapter 5
Recursive Encounters with Ourselves: The Hypothesis of
Extended Cognition in Theory and Practice
The belief that the organic is the chief criterion of what is authentic in art
and life continues, it need hardly be said, to have great force with us, the
more as we become alarmed by the deterioration of the organic
environment. The sense of something intervening between man and his
own organic endowment is a powerful element in the modern
consciousness, an overt and exigent issue in our culture. 1
That technologies of the written word are somehow corrupting our native cognitive
capabilities, that we are becoming dependent on externalized cognitive aids, and that such
dependence has wide-ranging social repercussions, are worries that have permeated the
popular culture since the days of Socrates. "I see within us all (myself included) the
replacement of complex inner density with a new kind of self," Richard Foreman writes
in an essay that accompanied his play The Pancake People. This new self is shallow,
containing "less and less of an inner repertory of dense cultural inheritance." 2 Nicholas
Carr echoes these words in his recent article for the Atlantic Monthly, writing: "Over the
past few years I’ve had an uncomfortable sense that someone, or something, has been
tinkering with my brain, remapping the neural circuitry, reprogramming the memory."

1

Trilling 127-128.

2

Foreman 2005.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 135
"The deep reading that used to come naturally has become a struggle," Carr concludes in
an article which asks whether Google is making us stupid. 3
And yet, many also instinctively believe that technology is working in exactly the
opposite direction: that it expands, rather than contracts human possibilities. In a recent
bestseller promoted by the likes of Bill Gates and Nicholas Negroponte, the authors and
Microsoft researchers Gordon Bell and Jim Gemmell write about the era of total recall—
a time when the advances in computer technology will "change the way we work and
learn [...] unleash our creativity and improve our health," and ultimately "change what it
means to be human." 4 "The era of total recall is dawning," write Bell and Gemmell:
You may embrace full-scale “life logging,” and devote much effort to
maximizing your e-memories, or you may prefer to record your activities
only modestly and selectively, or even reject the whole idea and strive to
leave as small a digital life-footprint as possible [...] Whether you are an
early adopter, a late adopter, or a never-in-a-million-years nonadopter,
society at large is on an inexorable path toward Total Recall technology
and it is going to transform the world around you. The power of this
transformation will be awesome. 5
Regardless of your position in this on-going debate between the skeptics and the
cheerleaders of new technology, it is important to note that both camps make some
implicit assumptions about the role of technology in human development. Both

3

Carr 2008.

4

Bell and Gemmell 4.

5

Ibid 6.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 136
arguments contain an implicit model of the mind, by which certain extra-corporeal
prosthetic tools are seen to extend or diminish the mind's natural intellectual capabilities.
The purpose of this chapter is to explore this thesis in a more formal way, first by
summarizing the hypothesis of extended cognition, advanced recently by several
prominent philosophers of mind, and second to contextualize that hypothesis historically,
in order to test the philosophical intuitions implicit in the conversation against real-world
experience.

The Hypothesis of Extended Cognition (HEC)
The hypothesis of extended cognition (HEC) holds that certain cognitive
processes can be viewed as extending beyond the boundaries of the human body into
their physical, social, and symbolic environments. Andy Clark and David Chalmers
suggest an example involving Otto and Inga: two individuals on their way to an art
exhibition. Inga remembers the location of the museum by memory. Otto suffers from
Alzheimer's, and must consult his notebook to find the exhibition. Clark and Chalmers
posit that the information in Otto's notebook is the same as the information in Inga's head.
And were the notebook literally inside Otto's brain somehow, we would have no trouble
equating the two cognitive acts of remembrance: Inga simply remembers how to get to
the exhibition, while Otto incorporates some cognitive aids to facilitate his memory. 6
For the externalists—Clark, Chalmers, Wilson, and others—the differences
between Otto's and Inga's case are superficial: both are engaged in essentially identical
6

Clark & Chalmers 1998; Wilson & Clark, 2009.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 137
cognitive tasks of recollection. On this view Otto's usage of a notebook constitutes
something like a unified cognitive system, which encompasses parts of Otto's brain and
parts of the physical pen-and-paper apparatus. The pen and the notebook simply
constitute the material or technological elements of the system, enabling the storage and
the retrieval of information. Similarly, the notation itself—the alphabet by which Otto is
able to encode the needed information—can be seen as a symbolic and social component
of the system. Not just Otto's notes, but all language, according to the externalists, serves
as a kind of ready-made mental scaffolding, which enables a level of computation and
analysis otherwise unavailable to primates. 7 The study of cognition therefore must
expand beyond the skin-and-bone boundary of the human brain to include the social,
symbolic, and material (technological) artifacts involved in human thought. To study
Otto's brain is to also to study the pen, the notebook, and the notes Otto takes when he
uses these things to remember the details of his appointment.
In another paradigmatic example of HEC-based analysis, Edwin Hutchins
examines the workings of a commercial airliner in flight, showing "how the cockpit
system performs the cognitive task of computing and remembering a set of
correspondences between airspeed and wind configuration." 8 The system-level view of
cognition draws attention to the combination of mechanical, electronic, and biological
processes responsible for the flow and storage of information within the plane's cockpit.
The system can be said to "remember" its speeds, writes Hutchins. It "computes,"
7

Clark 2008, 44-81; Dennett 1996.

8

Hutchins 1995, 266.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 138
"controls," "makes use of representations" and otherwise distributes cognitive labor.
Were we to ask, "Who is landing the plane?" we would expect Hutchins to answer "the
cockpit system as a whole." 9

Two types of extension
The opponents of HEC reject the view of cognition as anything other than what
goes on inside the body and the brain. Fred Adams and Ken Aizawa in particular have
staked out a clearly delineated position in defense of what the authors call "contingent
intracranialism." On this view, the "mark of the cognitive" is located squarely within the
brain, as a matter of a contingent empirical fact. 10 To prove their point, Adams and
Aizawa compare our intuitions about human tool use and animal digestion. Imagine
someone using loping shears to trim a bush, for example. Although the activity of
"trimming-a-bush" as a whole seems to be a combined product of human muscular
contraction and the mechanical capabilities of the loping shears, we would not be
compelled to think of loping shears as "extended muscular contraction."
By contrast, something like arachnoid digestion constitutes a digestive process
that is truly external. Arachnoid digestion happens outside of the spider's body literally:
the spider regurgitates digestive enzymes into or unto its prey. What happens in our
stomachs happens outside the strict corporeal boundaries of the spider. We could
therefore meaningfully talk about "extended digestion" when it comes to spiders. But, for

9
10

Ibid 285-286.
Adams and Aizawa 2001.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 139
Adams and Aizawa, Otto's notebook-reliant memory looks less like arachnoid digestion
and more like the discrete movement of muscle against the mechanism of the garden
shears. Otto is not thinking literally outside of his head. Like the man with the garden
shears, he is using a tool to compliment the exercise of some internal, biological function.
But it seems to me that this line of reasoning is simply begging the question. Adams and
Aizawa merely appeal to a scientific standard of internalsim, where the scientific
standard is precisely the thing that is being called into question. One gets the sneaking
suspicion that the argument is really about definitions, with one side appealing to
common sense and the other to scientific standards. 11
My own suspicions about HEC rise from the observation that the existentialist
argument seems to contain two distinct propositions about the nature of cognitive
extension, each carrying distinct implications for practical analysis of complex cognitive
tasks. Let's return to the example suggested by Hutchins in "How a Cockpit Remembers
its Speed". We begin by noting that a plane is a curiously anthropomorphic structure. It
has something like a head, a tail, and a belly: cockpit windows where we would expect
eyes, and a hole where we would expect to see an anus. It is thus easy to imagine this
structure as sentient somehow. We may for example, say "it thinks, it sees," or "it eats"
without much stretching of the imagination.

11

"We think that greater attention to cognitive psychology textbooks helps to highlight
these differences, where greater attention to ordinary language tends to efface these
differences" (Adams and Aizawa 2009, 33).

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 140
Suppose then, instead of discussing a complex, high-level biological process such
as cognition, we were to talk about digestion. The hypothesis of extended digestion
would then hold that digestion is not limited by the human body, and that it may be seen
as a systematic property of the plane as a whole. On this view, the plane—its service staff
and food storage mechanisms—all participate in digestion, defined by the uptake of food,
its distribution, and the disposal of waste. We may even go as far as to say that digestion
is something that happens in the belly of the plane. Food is conveyed within by some
mechanical means, it is then divvied up among the passengers, processed, and expelled in
bulk with the emptying of the airplane's holding tanks.
How far are we willing to take the proposition of airplane digestion? Not very far
at all, I would argue. Clearly, this is not digestion as we know it. It has some structural
affinities to animal digestion (the food is conveyed within, broken down, expelled) along
with important structural differences (the food it is not metabolized, for example). Thus a
strong claim to airplane digestion must be rejected as an imprecise metaphor, by which
the concept of a given process is transferred from one entity to another by structural
similarity (the same would hold true were we to consider fueling as a type of digestion).
Such metaphoric transference may prove to be conceptually useful in certain
types of analysis, as when the airlines want to improve the timely feeding of their
passengers, for example. "The plane needs to eat," they might say. "Our staff has to feed
the plane in a timely fashion." But, the metaphor strains under scrutiny. We may as well
stick to a more exacting description of the process. In any case, what we have done here
is extend the natural concept of "digestion" (in its ordinary meaning) to an inanimate

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 141
entity, or a system of entities that includes biological and non-biological components.
Furthermore, we have discovered that such a functional analogy is subject to confusion
by metaphor.
Extrapolating from these observations, we should be able to draw the same
conclusions about cognition. The cockpit may look as if it is "'remembering its speed,"
but its "memory"' is a mere metaphor. The two processes— human remembrance and
whatever happens in the cockpit—never reach full equivalence. The metaphor does not
inspire our full commitment. It is an alluring metaphor however, particularly because the
cockpit's shape and location (in relation to the body of the plane) remind us of the human
head. It might be a useful metaphor for analyzing the information flow within the cockpit,
but it is imprecise when it comes to understanding human cognition as such. All that is
meant by human cognition does not map precisely unto the cognition as applied to the
airplane cockpit. Clearly some parts of the original definition are simply left out—the
firing of neurons and the transmission of glutamate, GABA, or dopamine. Some aspect of
the cockpit's operation may be likened to those biological processes, but nobody would
hold that they are fully equivalent.
There is a possibility of another, weaker claim to extended digestion, to continue
our example. The conveyance of food from the grocery shelves to the mouth of an
individual airplane passenger may well be an important part of that passenger's digestive
process. We are no longer talking about digestion in a metaphoric sense, as we did when
thinking about the belly of the plane. I mean now literal digestion, as in "the breaking
down of food." In that sense, there is no reason for us to view our own digestion as much

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 142
different from a spider's. The preparation of food external to the human body could be
viewed much in the same way as we view arachnoid digestion. Both are external
processes evolved to aid in the break-down of tissues otherwise difficult to digest
internally. The spider regurgitates enzymes, where we use a knife, a fork, a cheese grater,
or any other kitchen implement for that matter. Following similar logic, we may view the
catering company responsible for preparing the airline food as part of that extended
digestion system. The cooks, the forks, and the stewards all literally facilitate the breakdown and the conveyance of food into the passenger's belly. More than a thought
experiment, the understanding of digestion in this extended sense could be quite useful in
certain types of analysis, as in identifying the cause of foodborne illness, for example. In
the previous case we were making a biomorphic analogy between two distinct processes:
the digestion of food and the fuelling or the supply of the plane. But now, we are actually
trying to expand the original concept of digestion, usually thought to be an internal
process, to include all sort of external mechanisms. We are no longer making an
imprecise analogy. Our position is one of true digestive externalism.
But in expanding the definition of digestion outwards, we run into what I would
like to call "the problem of arbitrary limits." Let us return to cognition for the moment. In
thinking about the cognitive tasks involved in landing a plane, we began by including the
cockpit instrumentation and the communication between the pilots into the equation. But
why limit ourselves to the plane in our analysis? The runway participates in the landing,
and so do the dispatchers in the control tower. We may then say the airport system as a
whole is landing the plane. That too seems to be an arbitrary boundary. The dispatchers

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 143
rely on a global network which memorizes, computes, and predicts landing parameters.
At the limits of this query is unbridled monism. The activity of "landing a plane" begins
to lose its meaning when the activity of the pilot is coupled with the entire universe.
I conclude then, to say that extending the concept of cognition to the cockpit of
the plane is subject to the limit problem. The disavowal of the body and/or brain as the
natural boundary of cognition leads to an arbitrary placement of yet another boundary.
We have simply substituted the natural physical limits of the brain with those of the
airplane cockpit. And nothing holds us back from pushing the boundaries of cognition
ever outward. Every boundary seems artificial, and every system seems to be a part of a
larger system that could be seen as participating in the cognitive task at hand. In
embracing the extension hypothesis literally, we have traded metaphoric imprecision for
the problem of arbitrary limits.

Case Studies in HEC
These notes may seem like some rather esoteric comments on a technical
conversation. And yet the contemporary conversation surrounding technology and its
impact on society frequently contains an implicit version of the extended cognition
hypothesis. It is certainly present in the popular writings of Nicholas Carr, Gordon Bell,
and Richard Foreman. But the anxiety and the excitement over HEC is hardly a modern
phenomenon. Plato's concern with the written word in Phaedrus could also be read as a
variation on the hypothesis. If you would recall, in Phaedrus the king of Thebes is weary
of the divine gift of the alphabet. "You have invented an elixir not of memory, but of

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 144
reminding," he tells Ammon, "and you offer your pupils the appearance of wisdom, not
true wisdom, for they will read many things without instruction and will therefore seem
to know many things, when they are for the most part ignorant." In other words, the
alphabet will weaken man's natural capacity to remember. It may also corrupt the very
nature of learning and knowledge itself. We have encountered this very thesis in the
discussion on Heidegger's philosophy of technology. Lionel Trilling has described this
reoccurring sentiment as "the sense of something intervening between man and his own
organic endowment," and considered it "a powerful element in the modern
consciousness, an overt and exigent issue in our culture." 12
The pure distillation of HEC in the literature on the philosophy of mind helps us
identify the trope of extended cognition in several differing historical and technological
contexts, if only in a diluted, weaker form. In what follows, I would like to stage two
historical encounters between technology and print culture. These encounters are meant
to lay bare the artifacts of extended cognition—artifacts both in the sense of an object and
in the sense of a spurious byproduct of the hypothesis itself. The first of these concerns
theory of archives and Samuel Beckett's 1958 radio play Krapp's Last Tape. In the
second, I would like to critique the often-quoted dictum from Marshal McLuhan's
Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, published in 1964.

12

Trilling 127-128.

First Encounter: Librarians of the Self
Beckett sets the stage for his 1958 Krapp's Last Tape on "a late evening in the
future." 13 The reason for this rather ambiguous dating is probably technological. The first
personal tape-recorders were manufactured in Germany in the early 1930s, with public
demonstrations of the device happening as early as 1933 in Europe. 14 The play makes it
clear that Krapp is in the habit of reviewing and recording his tapes on the eve of his
birthday. On this particular evening, he is turning sixty-nine, and he is listening to a
recording of his thirty-nine year-old self, who in turn reports listening to a ten-to-twelve
year-old tape. This dating sequence places the work well into the mid-1970s by a
conservative estimate—a date which is ironically, more than a decade after the invention
of the compact cassette tape (1962) by Phillips and only a few years before the
introduction of the iconic Sony Walkman product line (1979). 15 It is likely that Beckett
wanted to protect the chronological integrity of the plot by shifting the time of the play
forward. What he could not have predicted is the increasing pace of technological
innovation in the twentieth century.
These modest annotations to Beckett's work are not meant to be facetious. The
multiplicity of Krapp's fictional selves is made logically possible by the literary and the
technological device alike. The seeming unity of Krapp's consciousness and indeed, the

13 Beckett 55.

14 A similar device that used magnetic wire to record sound was available to
the military in the 1920s (Morton 106-109).

15 All dates according to Morton's Sound Recording.

stage appearance of consciousness itself are aided by the use of the
tape-recorder. The device on the stage creates the illusion of Krapp's inner
life; it allows the author to shift the narrative in time; it multiplies and
refracts the images of the main character of the play. The reel-to-reel player
functions both as the audience and the actor, alternatively speaking and
listening, recording and transmitting. And ultimately, Krapp's fate is not only
linked to the tape-recorder, it is created by and for this technological
medium. 16 But just as Krapp is created by the tape, the tape is Krapp's
creation—technology itself being inextricably enmeshed in the narcissistic
activity of human culture. The taperecorder cannot occupy the center stage—it
must recede into the background to become invisible. The player exists to
reflect Krapp's image back to Krapp and in the process, to record the encounter
for later reevaluation and re-recording. 17 This almost mythical recursion
promotes Krapp's character to the archetypal role of the librarian, whose task
is to collect, to preserve, and to curate his own personal experience—a
librarian of the self.  In this light, the specificity of the tape as a medium
is not terribly important. The story would be similarly plausible were it set a
century prior, using a conventional diary as its medium, or written some
decades later under the title of Krapp's Last Facebook Page. 18 Krapp's status
as a librarian is confirmed in his elaborate filing system, by which he stores
and organizes his recordings. He goes through several of his filing cabinets,

16 The play was inspired by and written for radio.  17 Recursivity also noted
in Breuer, Rolf. "Paradox in Beckett," The Modern Language Review Vol. 88, No.
3 (Jul., 1993), pp. 559-580.  18 Although I suspect both would make for far
more boring plays.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 147
"peering and poking at the boxes" as if to check the integrity of his collection, before
settling on the tape from his thirty-ninth birthday ("Box Three, Spool Five" he says with
relish.) The cardboard storage boxes, the drawers, the ledger, and the very word itself—
"spool," "spooool"—make him increasingly happy. Beckett presents Krapp's archival
activity as a kind of a Chaplinesque comedy routine, with erotic overtones:
Krapp remains a moment motionless, heaves a great sigh, looks at his
watch, fumbles in his pockets, takes out an envelope, puts it back,
fumbles, takes out a small bunch of keys, raises it to his eyes, chooses a
key, gets up and moves to front of table. He stoops, unlocks first drawer,
peers into it, feels about inside it, takes out a reel of tape, peers at it, puts it
back, locks drawer, unlocks second drawer peers into it, feels about inside
it, takes out a large banana, peers at it, locks drawer, puts keys back in his
pocket. He turns, advances to edge of stage, halts, strokes banana, peels it,
drops skin at his feet, puts end of banana in his mouth and remains
motionless, staring vacuously before him [...] He treads on skin, slips,
nearly falls, recovers himself, stoops and peers at skin and finally pushes
it, still stooping, with his foot over the edge of the stage into pit. He
resumes his pacing, finishes banana, returns to table, sits down, remains a
moment motionless, heaves a great sigh, takes keys from his pockets,
raises them to his eyes, chooses key, gets up and moves to front of table,
unlocks second drawer, takes out a second large banana, peers at it, locks
drawer, puts back his keys in his pocket, turns, advances to the edge of
stage, halts, strokes banana, peels it, tosses skin into pit, puts an end of
banana in his mouth and remains motionless, staring vacuously before
him 19

19

Beckett 10-11.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 148
These stage directions exude a nervous energy one would expect before an erotic
encounter: Krapp is being clumsy and excited. Box Three, Spool Five does indeed
contain an account of a past romance, but the encounter Krapp is excited about
is with the archive—that is with himself. The suggestive stroking of the banana
punctuates the onanistic nature of Krapp's archival activity.  Let us envision
Krapp's archiving habits for a moment. The stage directions specify a den and a
small table containing two drawers that open towards the audience.  The table
holds a tape-recorder, a microphone, and "a number of cardboard boxes
containing reels of recorded tapes." 20 How many reels are there? Krapp is
sixty-nine, and after more than forty years of recording he must have
accumulated somewhere around forty reels (assuming that his recording sessions
lasted around a reel each). Reading from the ledger, Krapp counts nine boxes.
The reel from his thirty-ninth birthday is in box three, spool five. What of
his tape-recorder? In 1958, when Beckett began writing his play (he continued
to rework it well into the 1970s) there were at least several dozen
tape-recorders on the market, with the most popular brands being Ampex, Crown,
Magnetophon, Magnecorder, Sony, Webcor, and Wollensak (see Appendix, Table 1).
The smaller portable, battery-operated versions of these recorders ranged in
price from two to three hundred dollars, which adjusted for inflation would
give us a range between 1,500 and 2,200 in 2009 dollars. The expense of the
device contributes to the image of Krapp as a man of independent means, who has
perhaps fallen on some hard times: he is

20

Beckett 3.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 149
wearing ill-fitting trousers, a black sleeveless coat, and a "surprising pair of dirty white
boots, size ten at least, very narrow and pointed." 21
Krapp's collection too has seen better times, for even the archetypal librarian of
the self must face the problems faced by any librarian. The theoretically perfect recursion
of the medium strains under practical scrutiny: classification systems deteriorate,
descriptions lose their meaning, 22 and even Krapp's own auditory mirror image betrays
him when Krapp is forced to look up the word "viduity" in the dictionary (a word that
made sense to him thirty years ago). Krapp's Last Tape, as it is conventionally
interpreted, is a cautionary tale about "the last"—time, memory, desire, and nostalgia. 23
But it is also a commentary about the "tape." Reel-to-reel recorders too will need further
and progressively more expansive annotations for the play to continue to produce
meaning. Thus, with the curtain drawn, we the audience, the readers, and the custodians
of this work are almost immediately implicated in Krapp's narcissistic archival habits.
Krapp's Last Tape is also a tape in our own collection—a tape that will continue to
comfort and to unsettle us well into our own dotage.

21

Beckett 3.

22

"Hm . . . The black ball . . . (He raises his head, stares blankly front. Puzzled.) Black ball? . . .
(He peers again at ledger, reads.) The dark nurse . . . (He raises his head, broods, peers again
at ledger, reads.) Slight improvement in bowel condition . . . Hm . . . Memorable . . . what?
(He peers closer.) Equinox, memorable equinox. (He raises his head, stares blankly front.
Puzzled.) Memorable equinox? . . . (Pause. He shrugs his head shoulders, peers again at
ledger, reads)" (Beckett 5).

23

Doherty 191-204.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 150
In examining the encounter between Krapp, his tape-recorder, and his past self, I
would like to shift the focus of the conversation about archives from the public to the
private sphere. Jacques Derrida's "Archive Fever," given as a lecture in 1994 during a
conference entitled "Memory: The Question of Archives" and later published in
Diacritics, remains perhaps the paradigmatic text in the tradition that takes the archive to
be a predominately public space, subject to the power dynamics between the patrons and
the custodians of the institution. For Derrida and his followers, the archive "has the force
of law, of a law which is the law of the house (oikos), of the house as place, domicile,
family, lineage, or institution." 24 Such a place preserves but also shelters the documents
within. It remembers and forgets, so to speak. The word itself—archive—suggests
arkheion: "initially a house, a domicile, and address," but also archons, or "those who
commanded." 25 In Derrida's understanding, the archive is thus both a location and a
power structure. And ultimately, it is an institution, like the Freud Museum, where the
paper was first given.
Consider by contrast Krapp's dingy collection. It is hardly an institution—it
receives neither grants nor visitors, and Krapp himself is hardly a proper archon (he
throws the tapes down in anger, and unlike Freud, he leaves no heirs to continue his
lineage). In contrast to the Freud Museum, his collection mostly consists of documents
that have only a deeply personal significance. His archive has less to do with social
power structures and more to do with the mechanisms of private identity formation,

24 Derrida 12.
25 Derrida 9.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 151
remembrance, and nostalgia. To mimic Derrida here, we could say that his collection is a
recollection—it is not a house, but a yearning for a house (nostalgia, from the Greek
nostos, a homecoming 26).
Of course, Krapp is only an archetype, the harbinger, and a symbol of a new type
of an archivist. But even symbolically, his collection could not exist without the
particular technology of the tape-recorder. That is to say that the semiotics of the private
archive are enabled by the applied particularities (pragmatics) of the specific archiving
practice (See Table 2).
Type:

Paper

Record / Cylinder

Magnetic Tape Digital / Cloud

Portability

high

low

average

deviceindependent

Capacity

low

low

average

Time shift

quick, tactile, quick, tactile, imprecise slow, linear,

near instant,

imprecise

precise

imprecise

virtually unlimited

Search

indexed

none, visual

seek, mechanical indexed

Size

small

large

small

irrelevant

Shape

square

round

long

fuzzy

Price

cheap

expensive

affordable

cheap

Power source

none

mechanical, electrical

batteries,

batteries,

electrical

electrical

Table 2: Media comparison, 20th Century

26 OED.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 152
This chart is by no means complete. We have not accounted for the distinctions
between digital storage devices, laser disks, film, or stone tablets for that matter. What
matters is that the medium is largely independent from the type of information stored on
it, and this contrary to Marshall McLuhan infamous "the medium is the message"
dictum. 27 The world itself "medium" is misleading in this context. We could for example
say that paint is the medium of painting. But what about the photograph of a painting? Or
its digital reproduction? The situation is even more confusing when we begin thinking
about music, for example. What is the medium for J.S. Bach's Double Violin Concerto:
the violin or the music sheet which contains the score? We are on yet more precarious
terrain when considering hybrid "media," like film or television that are comprised of
multiple sources and that use multiple modes of transmission.
The confusion enters the conversation when we conflate the modality of the
information (e.g. music, image, text) with the physical channel of its transmission (the
medium proper). Modality may very well be the message. Thus, it may be true that when
one plays the violin, the music can be said to express itself in musical terms. But not the
violin! I could use a violin to transmit a picture of an orchestra over a dial-up modem, for
example. This would only involve the question of how to encode the visual information
into a state transmittable by the violin (a primarily auditory instrument).
The channel of communication—the medium proper—is in fact, informationagnostic. That is to say that it has no preference about the message being transmitted (nor

27

McLuhan 7-22.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 153
can it have a preference for anything at all, formally speaking—preference being a
property we ascribe to objects that are at least animate). We could therefore transmit a
sonata by playing a violin, as sheet-music, on a vinyl disk, recorded on tape, or by using
an illegal peer-to-peer network. In each case, the information transmitted remains more or
less the same, depending on the quality of your violin playing, the fidelity of your
speakers, or the compression ratio of your digital encoding. It would be wrong too to
consider any of these sources as somehow primal, with others being something like
"mere copies" of the original. We could for example, start by composing music on paper.
Alternatively, we could first play a piece of music and then transcribe it into musical
notation. In an extreme but perfectly plausible case, we could compose by magnetizing a
length of ferrous tape first, and only then play the violin to reproduce what we have
"written."
The medium does not know anything about the message. The way in which we
store, access, and retrieve the encoded information is determined by the medium,
however. We are the ones being shaped by the media. I do mean this rather literally: the
stage directions for Krapp's Last Tape would be very different were Krapp writing a
diary, or browsing his online social networking profile, or if he were to embed a memory
chip in his brain that was able to store and retrieve the same messages from his thirtynine year-old self as the tape-recorder. The actor's body would move differently in each
of these cases—his senses and his thought would be altered in many subtle ways,
depending on the channel of communication.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 154
The separation between mode and medium allows us to retain a certain clarity of
vision in a rather muddled conversation about "media history." Modalities such as visual
arts, music or literature do not necessarily evolve, in the normative sense of the word.
Yes, it may be true that Filippo Brunelleschi invented the optical linear perspective in
1425. But the normative evolution of art could only make sense only against some
concrete pragmatic goals, which the aesthetic realm lacks by definition. Nothing is gained
or lost when the fashion changes from square-toed to pointy-toed shoes, and then back
again—to use an example that would surely please Mr. Krapp. Neither is "better" or
"worse" for the participants in that sphere of cultural activity. By contrast, the concept of
the medium does contain some sense of normative valuation, also by definition. That is to
say that the medium has a job, which is to facilitate the storage, the transmission, and the
retrieval of information. And there is such a thing as doing this job better or more
efficiently. More is always better in this case: more storage, faster access, more reliable
transmission. When the quality of the information is not sacrificed, there are no instances
were less would be preferable by anyone with limited time and resources. For example, I
would like to be able to read or write faster. I value both of these activities, but my time
to perform them is limited by my lifespan. Assuming I could gain speed without any
degradation in clarity or comprehension, and barring any psychological ill effects, the
idea of more in this case must be a good onto itself.
Armed with these insights, we can now return to the perhaps obvious idea that
Krapp's collection could not exist without the particular technology of the tape-recorder.
Krapp's Last Tape was made possible by the storage capacity, its portability, power

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 155
source, size, search capacity, price, and yes, even the shape of the reel and the tape
recorder. It is at this point, that I am able to restate the broadly historical thesis of this
section: that these very same attributes have enabled a shift in the collecting practices of
the western world—transposing the locus of our archival practice from the institutional to
the private sphere.

Second Encounter: The Medium is Not the Message
McLuhan's Understanding Media is a fitting companion to the modern
conversation on extended cognition, first because it announces its allegiance to the
hypothesis openly and from the very first lines of the treatise, and second because it so
readily exceeds the hypothesis rhetorically, falling into the traps of metaphoric
imprecision and limitless expansion. For those unfamiliar with the work, it would be
useful to know that McLuhan conceives of his project as a study "on the extensions of
man." He writes:
During the mechanical ages we had extended our bodies in space, today,
after more than a century of electric technology, we have extended our
central nervous system itself in a global embrace [...] Rapidly we approach
the final phase of the extensions of man—the technological simulation of
consciousness, when the creative process of knowing will be collectively
and corporately extended to the whole of human society, much as we have
already extended our senses and our nerves by the various media. 28

28

McLuhan 4.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 156
Granted, McLuhan's writing lacks the precision of HEC, which is advanced from the
platforms of analytic philosophy and cognitive science. And yet, it is clear that
throughout Understanding Media, McLuhan is committed to a version of the extended
mind hypothesis, which in his vocabulary translates into a vision of global, limitless
expansion of consciousness, facilitated by technology. For McLuhan our collective
"nervous system" is "technologically extended to the whole of mankind." 29 Such holistic
monism is declared literally as a matter of faith. "The aspiration of our time for
wholeness, empathy, and depth of awareness is a natural adjunct of electric technology,"
he writes. "There is a deep faith to be found in this new attitude—a faith that concerns the
ultimate harmony of all being." 30 And elsewhere: "In this electric age we see ourselves
being translated more and more in to the form of information, moving toward the
technological extension of consciousness." 31 And yet despite the frequency with which
this refrain appears in the book, the author does little to argue for it. We are asked to
subscribe to the extension thesis as a matter of apriori intuition. Nothing has been said to
bolster the claims of the extension, and most of McLuhan subsequent argument hinges on
the reader accepting this strong version of extension.
Consider for example McLuhan's quintessential "the medium is the message"
argument. I have shown elsewhere that we cannot take this to be literally true. The
principles of information theory would hold that the medium is precisely content-neutral,

29

Ibid.

30

Ibid 4-5.

31

Ibid 57.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 157
particularly when it comes to the transmission of digital information. So what exactly
does McLuhan means by "the medium is the message?" We must begin by understanding
what he means by "the medium" and "the message." In one sense, he means the media to
denote the conventional array of transition channels: radio, cinema, literature, television.
But in another sense, he means these transition channels to act literally as extensions of
the human sense apparatus. For example, in the beginning of chapter he writes that "the
social consequences of any medium—that is, of any extension of ourselves—result from
the new scale that is introduced into our affairs by each extension of ourselves, or by any
new technology." 32 Elsewhere he writes that "[...] that our human senses, of which all
media are extensions, are also fixed charges [...]." 33 The medium, for McLuhan, is thus a
marked concept, different from its dictionary definition in that it contains the hypothesis
of sense-extension.
The message in McLuhan's sense is equally specialized, and again related to the
extension hypothesis. "The 'message' of any medium or technology is the change of scale
or pace or pattern that introduces into human affairs," writes McLuhan. 34 In this sense
the message should not be confused with "content" or "information." The idea of content
only obscures the fact "it is the medium that shapes and controls the scale and form of
human association in action." 35 If media and messages are beginning to sound the same

32

Ibid 7, emphasis mine.

33

Ibid 21, emphasis mine.

34

Ibid 8.

35

Ibid 9.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 158
according to these definitions, it is because for McLuhan they explicitly are the same:
"the content of writing or print is speech," 36 he writes, and "the 'content' of any medium
is always another medium." 37
But this really is no thesis at all. McLuhan's dictum would not find cultural
relevance if his famous dictum was merely a tautology. "The medium is the message"
roughly translates into the proposition that all media, besides carrying their formal
content (or no content at all, as is the case with electric light in McLuhan's initial
example) affect our collective psyche in some way—in other words, a more generalized,
popular version of our extension hypothesis. But how committed is McLuhan to the
analogy between media and "extended consciousness" or "externalized nervous system."
Not very. The metaphor is alluring but imprecise. For McLuhan everything has the
potential to be mediafied—money, labor, technology, culture. It is all vaguely "an
extension of man," not just the extension of the senses, corporeal, or cognitive extension.
All products of human culture end up reconfiguring human culture as such—that is the
"message" of McLuhan's thesis.
What is at stake here for us? What does the extension hypothesis mean for the
study of human culture? Well, for one let's note that practically all examples of extended
cognition in the wild—I dare say all thought experiments mentioned or staged in the
literature on HEC—involve literary interfaces. Extended cognition in that sense requires
the storage and retrieval of information, facilitated by a symbolic notation system, and a
36

Ibid 18.

37

Ibid 9.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 159
medium on which such information can be stored for later retrieval. For Otto, this system
involved a notebook, a calendar, or a planner perhaps. For the pilots in the cockpit, the
flow of information also proceeds across devices which accept input and offer output in
symbolic notation: the number on the altimeter dial, the iconographic status indicators,
the keypad, and the control panel. It is also worth noting that all such systems and devices
are essentially dumb instruments. They become "cognitive" only in the moment of
interaction. Without Otto, the pen and paper does nothing. It comes to life only at the
point of interface.
The second observation we must make is that the hypothesis of extended
cognition brings the mind out of the head and into the material sphere of existence.
Taking HEC seriously means to supplement fMRI-based cognitive science with
anthropological, social observation of cognition at work. And since we are talking about
tools and habits of thought (rather than neurons, or brain-matter) we must acknowledge
that the formation of the mind, at least in the extended sense, can span beyond one's own,
private mental development. Extended, the mind gains a shared history.
HEC also implies that the long-standing anxiety over the impact of cognitive aids
on our natural human capacities—an anxiety that has been around at least since the times
of Socrates, an anxiety that is clearly expressed in Heidegger's philosophy of technology,
and that is featured prominently in the recent cautionary tales of human decline by
Richard Foreman and Nicholas Carr—that anxiety has at least the merit of considering
the mind in its embodied, contextualized form. The critique acknowledges the impact of
technology on our mental habits. But the negative value assessment is the least interesting

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 160
part of that argument. Cognitive aids are only as "good" or as "bad" as the purposes for
which they are used. If calculators have diminished our capacity to do math in our heads,
they have also alleviated much tedium involved in mundane everyday arithmetic—at the
bank, at the supermarket, and at home. And few would argue that mass literacy (as a
technology) had anything but a positive effect on our society, and that despite whatever
effects literacy may have on our "natural" ability to remember things without writing.
"Natural" is, in this case, an artificial construct, tied to one's willingness to engage in
nostalgic reverie about an idyllic state of unadulterated past.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 161

Appendix
Table 1: A range of personal reel-to-reel tape recorders from a 1958 catalog.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 162

Works Cited
Aarseth, Espen J. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature. Baltimore, Md.:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.
Adams, Fred, and Ken Aizawa. "The bounds of cognition." Philosophical Psychology
14, no. 1 (2001): 43-64.
Adams, Fred, and Ken Aizawa. "Why the mind is still in the head." In Cambridge
Handbook of Situated Cognition. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Beckett, Samuel. Krapp's Last Tape, and Other Dramatic Pieces. New York: Grove
Press, 1960.
Bell, C. Gordon, and Jim Gemmell. Total Recall: How the E-Memory Revolution Will
Change Everything. New York: Dutton, 2009.
Blanchot, Maurice. The work of fire. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1995.
Breuer, Rolf. "Paradox in Beckett," The Modern Language Review Vol. 88, No. 3
(Jul., 1993), pp. 559-580.
Bush, Vannevar. 1945. "As We May Think." The Atlantic. 176, no. 1.
Bush, Vannevar, James M. Nyce, and Paul Kahn. From Memex to Hypertext:
Vannevar Bush and the Mind's Machine. Boston: Academic Press, 1991.
Carr, Nicholas. "Is Google Making Us Stupid? - Why you can't read the way you used
to." The Atlantic Monthly (2008).
Churchland, Paul M, and Patricia Smith Churchland. "Could a Machine Think?"
Scientific American, January (1990): 32-37.
Clark, Andy. "Intrinsic Content, Active Memory, and the Extended Mind." Analysis
65 (2005): 1-11.
Clark, Andy. "Memento's revenge: The extended mind, extended." In Objections and
Replies to the Extended Mind. Ashgate, 2006.
Clark, Andy. "Reasons, Robots and the Extended Mind." Mind and Language 16, no.
2 (2001): 121-145.
Clark, Andy. Supersizing the Mind. Uncorrected proofs, 2008.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 163
Clark, Andy, and David Chalmers. "The extended mind." Analysis 58, no. 1 (1998): 719.
Clark, Mark. "Suppressing Innovation: Bell Laboratories and Magnetic Recording."
Technology and Culture, Vol. 34, No. 3 (Jul., 1993), pp. 516-538.
Cohen, John. Human Robots in Myth and Science. A.S. Barnes, 1967.
Crawford, Hugh T. "Paterson, Memex, and Hypertext." American Literary History.
Vol. 8, No. 4 (Winter, 1996), pp. 665-682.
Dennett, Daniel Clement. Kinds of Minds: Toward an Understanding of
Consciousness. New York, NY: Basic Books, 1996.
Derrida, Jacques. Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1996.
Derrida, Jacques. Dissemination. University Of Chicago Press, 1983.
Doherty, Francis. "Krapp's Last Tape: The Artistry of the Last." Irish University
Review Vol. 12, No. 2 (Autumn, 1982), pp. 191-204.
Foreman, Richard. "The Pancake People." The Third Culture, 2005.
http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/foreman05/foreman05_index.html, accessed on
10/10/2009.
S. E. Gontarski, S.E. "Crapp's First Tapes: Beckett's Manuscript Revisions of 'Krapp's
Last Tape.'"vJournal of Modern Literature. Vol. 6, No. 1, Samuel Beckett Special
Number (Feb., 1977), pp. 61-68.
Heidegger, Martin. Parmenides. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992.
Hutchins, Edwin. "How a Cockpit Remembers Its Speeds." Cognitive Science 288
(1995): 265-288.
Kittler, Friedrich A. Gramophone, Film, Typewriter. Stanford, Calif: Stanford
University Press, 1999.
Kahler, Erich von. The Disintegration of Form in the Arts. New York: Braziller, 1968.
Kittler, Friedrich A. Gramophone, Film, Typewriter. Stanford, Calif: Stanford
University Press, 1999.
Latour, Bruno, and Steve Woolgar. Laboratory Life: The Social Construction of
Scientific Facts. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1979.

Recursive Encounters with Ourselves | 164
Liddell, Henry George, and Robert Scott. A lexicon abridged from Liddell and Scott's
Greek-English lexicon. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987.
McLuhan, Marshall. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. Cambridge,
Mass: MIT Press, 1994.
Morton, David. Sound Recording: The Life Story of a Technology. Greenwood
technographies. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2004.
Plato, and Harold North Fowler. Euthyphro; Apology; Crito; Phaedo; Phaedrus.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1977.
Read, Oliver, and Walter L. Welch. From Tin Foil to Stereo: Evolution of the
Phonograph. 1959.
Riskin, Jessica. Genesis Redux: Essays in the History and Philosophy of Artificial
Life. University Of Chicago Press, 2007.
Searle, John. Minds, Brains, and Science. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1984.
Trilling, Lionel. Sincerity and Authenticity. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University
Press, 1972.
Voskuhl, Adelheid. "Humans, Machines, and Conversations: An Ethnographic Study
of the Making of Automatic Speech Recognition Technologies." Social Studies Of
Science 34, no. 3 (2009): 393-421.
Wians, William Robert. Logos and Muthos: Philosophical Essays in Greek Literature.
Albany: SUNY Press, 2009.
Williams, Emmett. An Anthology of Concrete Poetry. New York: Something Else
Press, 1967.
Williams, Emmett. Selected shorter poems, 1950-1970. Stuttgart: Edition Hansjörg
Mayer, 1978.
Wilson, Robert A, and Andy Clark. "How to Situate Cognition: Letting Nature Take
its Course." In The Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition, Philip Robbins
and Murat Aydede, 55-78. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Wilson, Robert. "Collective memory, group minds, and the extended mind thesis."
Cognitive Processing 6 (2005).


