






The Dream of Algorithmic Imagination
(Originally "The Premise of Machine Literature" with suggested revisions.)
Dennis Tenen
dt2406@columbia.edu

This essay is not a screed against poetics computational, digital, algorithmic, or procedural. I do not agree with Friedrich Kittler when he writes, "under the conditions of high technology, literature has nothing more to say."1 Nor do I worry about computation with David Golumbia, who writes (quoting Gilles Deleuze) that "to submit a phenomenon to computation is to striate otherwise-smooth details, analog details, to push them upwards toward the sovereign, to make only high-level control available to the user, and then only those aspects of control that are deemed appropriate by the sovereign."2 Computers, like the Gutenberg press before them and even writing itself, are technologies of control and resistance. The letter that subjugates the individual to the state also makes the state venerable to the individual. We cannot hope to achieve a parity of arms, but we do increasingly achieve parity in computation. What used to be the realm of defense department-level mainframe "super-computers" is now available for pennies in the cloud. And whatever data the government or Facebook has on me, I have more on myself. My hope is not to limit my exposure to the "sovereign" forces of computation (an impossible and time-consuming task), but to overwhelm them with the digital detritus of my still very much mundane and human existence.
At the same time, I am not terribly excited about the advent of algorithmic criticism in its currently articulated form. Cyber- and hyper- texts of yesterday's future are today's outmoded relics, as might be the fate of trendy appeals to computers, electronic, digits, and data. I know, I might get in trouble for writing this, but when the first internet bubble burst, it revealed no real revolution in "electronic literature" (or worse yet, "biterature" as Peter Swirski would have it).3 Kindles, Google Books and e-readers remain surprisingly static formats. Writers have not generally embraced the affordances of new media, and the most radical examples of algorithmic poetics are still the experiments of OUILIPO writers from the middle of the last century—texts which owe their allegiance to the combinatorial mysticism of the middle ages.4 Similarly, and as many critics (and advocates) of the digital humanities like to point out, computational approaches to the study of literature have yielded few groundbreaking insights.5 I am utterly unconvinced for example by Stephen Ramsay's entreaty to "conceive of Woolf's novel as a ‘corpus' of separate documents (each speaker's monologue representing a separate document), and use the formula to factor the presence of a word in a particular speaker's vocabulary against the presence of that word in the other speakers' vocabularies."6 Ramsay's laudable goal is to introduce the reader to quantitative analysis, but the results are hardly "provocative" as he hopes. By his own words, the analysis only "conform to our general expectations of what distinguishes the characters" and "have no more claim to truth value than any ordinary reading procedure."7 Why bring the algorithmic equipment then? A poem or a novel remains uniquely suited for the analytical powers on the scale of the human brain. To study a single novel with an aid of a complicated apparatus is to bring the wrong tool for the job. One does not bring a telescope to the cinema—it does wrong to the medium and the instrument.
I write all of the above as someone intensely interested both in computational culture and in the computational approaches to the study of culture. The advent of information technology has spawned a myriad of new cultural forms and practices, many of them discursive, narrative, or otherwise textual. It is a fertile ground for a literary scholar, but only when the notion of literariness itself is allowed to grow with the times. The project of the digital humanities (in the literature departments in particular) is doomed to fail if it is reduced to studying the same source material, but now with the aid of computers. Most of what can be done to a poem or a novel with a computer can and indeed has been done by hand. That is not to say, with Stephen Marche, that "insight remains handmade," nor that algorithmic thinking is somehow "fascistic."8 Such Heideggerian romanticism betrays only a reductive misunderstanding of technology, just as the missionary zeal of the "digital revolution" can often verge on technological determinism. Both camps want to save the humanities, either from or by the means of computation. But, to my mind, the humanities are in no need of such an intervention. Language and literature has always been "under the conditions of high technology," from the very invention of writing, the Gutenberg press, and to the internet.  
In this essay then, I would like to search for a middle way between the fearful romantics and the exuberant determinists. Traversing a well-travelled field of combinatorial poetics, the essay contains three movements, connecting neglected but formative moments in the development of the algorithmic imagination. In the first of these movements, I 

The second, contains a case study in early structuralism, with a small little "discovery" that should be of interest to scholars of structuralism and digital humanists alike. And finally, by the means of a conclusion, I consider the contemporary research in the fields of narrative generation and artificial intelligence—research that usually happens in the departments of computer science and often in ignorance of its history.  

Ars Combinatoria
The birth of digital humanities and algorithmic criticism is commonly ascribed to Roberto Busa's work on computer-assisted concordances in the 1940s.9 In a more narrowly defined field like stylometry, the timeline often extends to the work of Augustus de Morgan and Thomas Mendenhall on authorship attribution in the second half of the 19th century.10 Puzzling in this genealogy of literary criticism is the relative lack of reference first to combinatorial and later to formalist or structuralist poetics. Ramsay's Reading Machines, a text nudging the discipline "toward an algorithmic criticism"11 has no mention of either tradition, even when the "transformational" methods he describes ("disassembling," "reordering," "reassembling") bear a direct resemblance to the medieval analytical work of Ramon Lllul and his followers, much more recent formalists like Boris Jarcho, Vladimir Propp, and Roman Jakobson, or the work of American structuralists in 1970s interested in transformational grammar (like Samuel Levin, J. P. Thorne, and Richard Ohmann).
	By all rights, the spiritual father of algorithmic criticism is not Father Busa, who was indeed a Jesuit priest, but Ramon Llull (also known as Raymond Lull or Lully in the English speaking world)—the 13th Century Majorcan friar mystic who was a near contemporary to both Dante and Roger Bacon.12 Llull believed that our knowledge about any given topic could be reduced to a set of primary concepts—an arcane system of principles, universals, and particulars—which in turn would be systematically combined to produce all possible statements about that topic.13 The essence of Llull's art was thus both analytical and generative, in that it first, relied on the atomic reduction of the critical vocabulary to a limited set of principles, and second, in that it produced a large number of axioms through systematic combination. To these ends, Llull employed an array of charts and diagrams, which consist of adjacency matrices and concentric circle graphs designed to facilitate discovery through combination. These proliferating and increasingly complex graphic devices, with their multi-nodal starbursts in a tangled conceptual net of vertices and edges, moved the occult imagination of medieval theology, the study of rhetoric, and philosophy. Anthony Bonner, Llull's most prolific scholar and translator, along with Martin Gardner and Umberto Eco have noted Llull's influence on later thinkers like Girdano Bruno, Petrus Ramus, Nicholas of Cusa, Francis Bacon, and, most importantly for our discussion, Gottfried Leibniz. Leibniz extended the Llullian method in Methesis universalis, and is likely had Llull's art in mind when writing his Explication de l'Arithmétique Binaire.14 He further improved on Llull's flat mechanisms by bringing them into the third dimension, from concentric circles to drums and gears driving a number of mechanical calculators. The Leibniz wheel and the step reckoner are among the devices which prefigure the modern digital computer.
	Although Bonner is careful to remind his readers that Llull's combinatorial art is based on mnemonic rather than on symbolic notation, scholars generally acknowledge his influence on the development of symbolic logic, in a relatively unbroken genealogy that runs from Aristotle to Llull, Leibniz, Bertrand Russell, Ludwig Wittgenstein and, finally, his student, Alan Turing.15 Llull's contribution to Aristotle's analytical method lies in his recognition of the categories as a mechanism, capable of generating new insight. I mean "mechanism" here literally. The diagrams were meant to function as a kind of a universal machine, not in the Turing sense, but in the sense of providing solutions in any sphere or discipline: truly, "a science of sciences."16 
At the same time, Llull's system was also confusing, both to his contemporaries and to a later audience. Living up to his generative methods, Llull was one of the most prolific writers of the European Middle Ages, publishing more that 260 treatises on a range of subjects from theology and medicine, to astronomy. Seduced by the complexity Llull's instrumentation, alchemists, astrologers, and charlatans used the combinatorial method to produce nonsense in the guise of science. The diagrams seemed to contain the world, promising much insight with little effort. Llull's own grandiose claims about the efficacy of his method did little to deter such a following. Francis Bacon referred to the art derisively as "a method of imposture, which nevertheless would no doubt be very acceptable to certain meddling wits," its object to "sprinkle little drops of science about, in such a manner that any sciolist may make some show and ostentation of learning," "a heap of the terms of all arts," "like a fripper's or broker's shop, that has ends of everything, but nothing of worth."17
A few centuries later, Stanley Fish is to find the same faults in the method of structuralist stylistics. Reading Michael Halliday, for example, he sees a profusion of atomic categories, which are combined in an arbitrary fashion to produce something that resembles science. He writes that the resulting distinctions are "minute," "infinite," and ultimately "meaningless," "for they refer to nothing except the categories of the system that produced them, categories which are themselves unrelated to anything outside their circle expect by an arbitrary act of assertion."18 In other words, the danger of any complicated formal apparatus is its tautological fertility. Llull's paper machines are capable of producing meaning infinitely, limited only by the number inputs. What seems like a symbolic science, is an occult symbol. It is not by accident, that Fish, in his recent writings, perceives an element of messianic theology in the digital humanities. Quoting Ramsay's Algorithmic Criticism, he writes, "the anti-methodology that refuses closure and insists on fecundity facilitates—no, demands—sharing, and builds an ever-expanding community of digital fellowship, an almost theological community in which everyone explores in 'the inexhaustible nature of divine meaning.'"19 
I make this broad parallel between Llull and Ramsay, Bacon and Fish, to remind myself that our digital moment is much less special than we often like to believe. Computers give us scale, but the promise and the peril of computation is already present in the legacy of Llull's combinatorial poetics. 
The first "golden age" of algorithmic literature has to be the German Baroque period, in which the principles of Llull's combinatorial composition were applied to literature and music alike. Notable among these experiments is the proteus verse of Quirinus Kuhlmann and Georg Philipp Harsdörffer. Proteus verse, according to Leibniz, is "a couplet or a longer poem, which is constructed in such a way that the order of words can be changed without destroying its meter or rhyme" (Leibniz, 86). A typical example of proteus verse is Harsdörffer's:
Ehr/ Kunst/ Geld/ Guth/ Lob/ Weib und Kind
Man hat/ sucht/ fehlt/ hofft/ und verschwind.

Honor, art, money, wealth, praise, wife, and children; 
Man had, sought, felt, hoped, and lost (Harsdörffer, 59-60).
The idea behind such poetry is to extend the creative process to the reader, who is encouraged to experiment with source material. Subsequent permutations produce new narratives and new shades of meaning: all these things man had and lost, all these things he lost and hoped to regain. The poem is not so much a poem but instructions to create poetry. 
Athanasius Kircher had similar goals in mind in designing the Arca Musarithmica—a box-like device that amounts to a three-dimensional look-up table, by which a composer not versed in music would combine predetermined musical phrases (written on wooden planks) to produce a complete piece of music. The device is akin to a musical "choose your own adventure" contraption, by which any combination of plot devices can be assembled into a passable narrative.
As is the case in the contemporary conversation on artificial intelligence, the early practitioners of algorithmic creativity understood their practice as challenging traditional notions of creative agency. The correspondence between Kircher and Kuhlmann in particular practically foreshadows BLAH. In response to Kircher's description of Arca Musarithmica, Kuhlmann is worried that the use of a similarly structured "poetry box" would amount to "mere versification, and not poetry" (sed versûs, non poëma.) Kuhlmann writes:
Sed lusus est ingeniosus, Ingeniose
Kirchere, non methodus, prima fronte
aliquid promittens, in recessu nihil solvens. Sine cista enim puer nihil potest respondere, & in cista nihil praeter verba intelligit; tot profert, 
quot audit, sine intellectu...
But [the poetry box] is just an ingenious game, ingenious Kircher, not a method, promising something on the surface, but solving nothing deep down. For without the box the boy [a student] can answer nothing, and with the box he understands nothing but words. He produces whatever he hears, without understanding, like a parrot (Kuhlmann, 4). 
Like Searle, Kuhlmann believes that to truly produce poetry 


Despite the critical attention given to the OULIPO experiments, I would argue here that a far more significant "silver age" of algorithmic composition began to take shape at the turn of the twentieth century, well before the advent of electronic computing. Allow me to make a few additional broad stokes here. Traditionally, we associate the word "formalism" with the work of the early-century Russian literary critics and scholars Boris Eichenbaum, Viktor Shklovsky, Yury Tynyanov, Roman Jakobson, and Vladimir Propp; the related work of the Prague Linguistic Circle in the 1920-30s; and the mostly Anglo-American New Critics of the mid-century like John Crowe Ransom, William K. Wimsatt, Monroe Beardsley, T.S. Eliot, and many others. But these developments were by-and-large critical developments—affecting more the reception than the practice of literary production. In this way, Propp's influential Morphology of the Folktale (1928) attempted to create a typology of recurring literary "functions" at work in Russian folk-tales. The typology contained thirty-one "morphemes" such as complicity, villainy, mediation, departure, victory, pursuit, return, rescue, and so on. But the work intended to analyze the genre, rather than to provide a formula for constructing folk tales. At least we can say that there were no known Russian writers who attempted to write folk-tales using Propp's morphology. Were there?


"seeks a new kind of audience for text analysis— one that is less concerned with fitness of method and the determination of interpretative boundaries, and one more concerned with evaluating the robustness of the discussion."20 Finish with Llull dual movement atomic and generative. His influence on literary studies.
	
Bag of words. Jarcho. Ohmann.

Finish with scale rather than instrument.

"The direction is the reverse in the digital humanities: first you run the numbers, and then you see if they prompt an interpretive hypothesis. The method, if it can be called that, is dictated by the capability of the tool. You have at your disposal an incredible computing power that can bring to analytical attention patterns of sameness and difference undetectable by the eye of the human reader. Because the patterns are undetectable, you don't know in advance what they are and you cannot begin your computer-aided search (called text-mining) in a motivated — that is, interpretively directed — way. You don't know what you're looking for or why you're looking for it. How then do you proceed?

The answer is, proceed randomly or on a whim, and see what turns up. You might wonder, for example, what place or location names appear in American literary texts published in 1851, and you devise a program that will tell you. You will then have data."


William Winder and Golumbia. After the history, a return to Golumbia.
To those who like Golumbia, I say that computation has an altenative.

Here is where I begin to get a little suspicious about the accepted history of ideas when it comes to formalism as a movement in literary criticism. In 1894, Georges Polti—a relatively minor French author—published Les Trente-Six Situations Dramatiques (translated into English in 1916 by William R. Kane as "Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations," published by the Editor Company). Judging by the number of imitations, the work was an almost immediate international success and remains in print today. Unlike Propp, Polti is very explicit about his influences. The work begins with a quote from J.W. Goethe, who writes that "Gozzi maintained that there can be but thirty-six tragic situations. Schiller took great pains to find more, but he was unable to find even so many as Gozzi" (Polti, 9).21 Polti writes that "in France, Gerard de Nerval alone had grasped and presented briefly the ensemble of all dramatic production, in an article upon Soumet's 'Jane Grey,' in L' Artiste" (10) but that "since Nerval, no one has treated, in Gozzi's genuinely technical manner, of the secrets of invention" (10-11).22 To derive his thirty-six situations Polti assembles "the principal dramas of China, of India, of Judea, and, needless to say, of the Greek theater," along with "the Spanish authors, the French classics, the Italians, the Germans of the Romantic revival, and our modern dramatic literature," and finally "two hundred of the examples […] from other literary genres akin to the dramatic: romance, epic, history, and from reality [!]" (Polti 13-14).23 The stated purpose of Polti's project is to ask "Which are the dramatic situations neglected by our own epoch? […] Which, on the other hand, are most in use today? Which are the most neglected, and which the most used, in each epoch, genre, school, author? What are the reasons for these preferences?"(14) These questions lead Polti to his thirty-six situations: supplication, deliverance, crime, pursuit, disaster, revolt, abduction, enigma, madness, ambition, and so on. Many of these correspond to Propp's thirty-one morphemes, although to his credit, Propp's improves on Polti's scheme by arranging the situations in chronological (from the point of view of the plot) sequence.
Despite the lofty historical and philosophical ambitions, Polti's work skews decidedly towards the craft of writing plots. The reader never does find out why certain "situations" are more prevalent in one epoch or the other. Rather the book's conclusion contains the following remarkable appeal to the reader:
Thus, from the first edition of this little book, I might offer (speaking not ironically but seriously) to dramatic authors and theatrical managers, ten thousand scenarios, totally different from those used repeatedly upon our stage in the last fifty years. The scenarios will be, needless to say, of a realistic and effective character. I will contract to deliver a thousand in eight days. For the production of a single gross, but twenty-four hours are required. Prices quoted on single dozens. Write or call, No. 19, Passage de l'Elysee des Beaux-Arts. The Situations will be detailed act by act, and, if desired, scene by scene (134).
Besides Polti's largely unacknowledged influence on the development of Russian Formalism,24 the principle impact of his work was and remains in the field of applied composition studies. Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations inspired countless imitations in the "writer's aid" genre, among these the most popular examples being William Wallace Cook's Plotto (1928), and Wycliffe A. Hill's Plot Genie (1931),25 among many others. Plot Genie in particular shows the genre's direct lineage to Ramon Llull's combinatorial diagrams. The booklet came with a cardboard wheel, by which the author could select a random combination of characters and plot devices.26
The proliferation and the popularity of combinatorial writer aids in the early twentieth century have to be attributed, at least in part, to the burgeoning American pulp fiction market. James D. Wood—a scholar and a contributor to The Pulp Companion online fan community—describes it in the following terms: 
The year is 1935. On every street corner, newsstands are brimming with pulp magazines. Readers young and old thrill to the battles of G-8 and Operator 5, to the adventures of the Spider, the Shadow and Doc Savage […] You are a pulp fiction writer. Seated behind your Remington typewriter, your fingers dance and the pages fly: trench-coated private eyes and sultry gun molls, hard riding sheriffs and gun-slinging desperadoes, fearless spacemen and bug-eyed monsters—for a penny a word, you can do it all […] It's Friday night. After a long day at the keyboard, should you have a bite of supper or just go to bed? The phone rings. It's the editor of Strange Science Magazine, and as usual, he sounds like he's double-parked. "I need a 50,000 word space opera," he barks. "On my desk, first thing Monday morning!" As a pulp fiction writer, you are a professional. You have no time to sit and wait to be inspired—you must produce on demand. As much as you need your dictionary and thesaurus, you need your story plotter.27
The turn of the twentieth century—modernism—is commonly characterized as the dawning of mass production: interchangeable parts, machine tools, and electrical power. We are accustomed to thinking that the paradigmatic aesthetic concern of the moderns was mass production, or rather the mass mechanical re-production of the work of art. Mechanical reproduction certainly contributed to the sharp decline in book prices in the first decades of the twentieth century, but the means of producing texts underwent a radical change too, unrelated to the mechanisms of the printing press. In the twentieth century we began to produce and consume algorithmically-constructed texts on a large scale.
Polti's Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations, Cook's Plotto, and Hills' Plot Genie were met with excoriating critical reception. "The subject and the scorn almost placed the subject of situation in the category of untouchables," Carl Dahlström writes in the 1936 issue of PMLA. In the concluding sentences of his book, Cook reports a conversation with a London publisher who believes that "Plotto will be condemned publicly—and probably used privately" (Cook, Ch.7). The critical exile continues to this day: JSTOR contains exactly one article devoted to Polti's work, a single mention of Plotto in a French-language article on mass literature, and nothing on Plot Genie.28 By what logic does the relatively obscure Vladimir Propp become canonized in the graduate literary studies curriculum, and the massively popular Georges Polti relegated to almost complete obscurity? 29 I want to make sure that my intentions in asking this are not misunderstood. I have no interest in promoting Polti's work, or detracting from Propp's contribution to the field. I merely want to point to the intuitive sense of collective discomfort with the notion of algorithmic composition. The idea just seems somehow to lessen the weight given to human agency in the act of literary creation—even to the point of preventing conversation on the topic. Polti himself understood this problem very clearly: "But I hear myself accused, with much violence, of an intent to 'kill imagination.' 'Enemy of fancy!' 'Destroyer of wonders!' 'Assassin of prodigy!" he writes at the end of Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations. "These and similar titles cause me not a blush," he concludes (Polti, 134). 
The enemy, in this case, is what Polti calls "the ultra-romantic" notion of the imagination—"the charlatanesque 'faculty,' analysis of which is, it would seem, eternally interdicted" (135). Polti writes:
One vigorous blow was, for the moment, given to this legend of the Imagination by Positivism, which asserted that this so-called creative faculty was merely the kaleidoscope of our memories, stirred by chance. But it did not sufficiently insist upon the inevitably banal and monotonous results of these chance stirrings, some of our memories-precisely those least interesting and least personal-repeating themselves a thousand times in our minds, returning mercilessly in all manner of method-less combinations (135).
The alternative to the method-less meandering of romantic imagination is guided experimentation. Here Polti envisions the extension of his inquiry, a "New Art" that thrives on the numerous, yet unexplored combinations of dramatic possibility.30 Pulp fiction was perhaps that new art, but Polti and his followers could not have anticipated the radical potential of procedural composition enabled by the developments in computer science and information technology.
Espen Aarseth wrote that computer literature should more precisely be regarded as cyborg literature, since the product of machine imagination is properly a combination of efforts between human and automated elements.31 But in that sense, we may view all literary production as an amalgam of individual, social, and inorganic compounds. That is to repeat the argument implicit in the previous two sections of this paper: the problem of machine literature does not hinge on the development of artificial intelligence. The composition of a sonnet, for example, is already a hybrid process, in that it combines the efforts of individual human and shared algorithmic imagination. And as history bears it out, procedural content generation has been a part of our literary life several centuries prior to the invention of the electronic computer. The emerging practice of digital humanities is remarkable not for the increasing life-like similarity between man and machine, but for our willingness to develop ever-more sophisticated algorithms by which the very idea of imagination is extended to non-human entities.
The reading of procedurally-generated texts cannot and should not therefore proceed by the analysis of generated content. This would be as fruitless as speaking Chinese with a room. It is also not terribly important to understand the technical capabilities of the hardware executing the code, as Peter Swirski suggests in his "Computhors and Biterature" (85). After all, the ideal computer is a universal machine—capable of following any set of instructions. The real "action" lies in the algorithm which mediates between the human, the machine, and the textual components of literary production. Consider the following verses from The Policeman's Beard Is Half Constructed—a book of poetry which was billed as "the first book ever written by a computer:" 
I gave the man a coat. I gave the woman a brassiere.
I gave myself an electric current. We all were 
happy and full of delight. Take the coat from the
man and remove the brassiere from the woman and take
the electric current from me and we will be sad
and full of anguish.

Happily and sloppily a skipping jackal watches an aloof crow. 
This is enthralling. Will the jackal eat the crow? I
fantasize about the jackal and the crow, about the crow in the 
expectations of the jackal. You may ponder about this too!

More than iron, more than lead, more than gold I need electricity. 
I need it more than I need lamb or pork or lettuce or cucumber. 
I need it for my dreams.32
These lines entertain because in them we imagine a budding intellect, like a child's—an intellect that reaches for the familiar form only to fail in subtle and endearing ways, and in failure to reveal the promise of a future genius. "The book has been proofread for spelling but otherwise is completely unedited," writes Racter's programmer, Bill Chamberlain, in the preface to the volume. A close analysis of code used to generate these verses reveals the extent to which the feeling of whimsical precociousness is carefully contrived by the program's human handlers.33 Chamberlain fails to mention the thousands of combinations that did not make it into the slim volume. Essentially, Racter is nothing more than a Madlibs fill-in-the-blank contraption, drawing on its vocabulary from a randomized databank.34
Considering that combination engines have been around since at least the thirteenth century, what significance is the fact that Policeman's Beard was produced by a computer? Would it make a difference if we arrived at the same texts by hand, ink, and paper?35 To read Racter's verse in full, without Chamberlain's stewardship, would be foolish and likely impossible—just as it would be impossible to read the 1014 permutations of Queneau's sonnet. In fact, no human would ever think to read the "Hundred Thousand Billion Poems" by sheer brute force, anticipating every possible combination. Rather, we would experiment with the sonnet until the rules of permutation become clear us, exposing the algorithm within. The poetry, in this case, obscures the autopoiesis of the algorithm. Its generative potential lies in the faculty of algorithmic imagination.

Somewhere between Ramsay's algorithmic criticism and Winder's writing machines is a dream of writers, readers, and critics that don't require human intervention, leaving us plenty of leisure time to watch television, program, or explore virtual worlds, although I suppose those activities too could be automated by the same logic. Adopting Llull. Mysticism plus rationalism.
Reading thousands, hundred thousands, and even millions of texts. Writing them. The spam ecosystem.

